Okay. Stroke. Stroke is a real essential part of PM&R. It's a core part of your
residency and your rotations if you're a medical student or a resident. And
thusly it is also a high yield topic for the board exam. So we will start our
discussion on stroke. All right. So what exactly is a stroke? We want to first
just define what that is. So we all are on the same page of what we're talking
about. So a stroke is some kind of blood supply interruption event, right?
Ischemia, basically, right? So I'm kind of blood supply interruption event
inside the brain that is linked to neurologic deficits. And that in fact causes
neurologic deficits in the body, right? So basically as we have here an
interruption of blood supply to the brain, not enough blood reaching some
neural tissue inside the brain, the neurons there, right? That directly causes
neurologic deficits, right? So signs and symptoms of intracranial neurologic
compromise. How does that manifest in somebody's body when they're having a
stroke? You typically will get focal neurologic deficits, you know, left
sided weakness and numbness, right? For example, a contralateral hemiplegia or
hemianesthesia is very common to see this. You'll often get cranial nerve
dysfunction as well as the cranial nerves are located inside the brain slash
brain stem, which depending on where the stroke takes place. You can get
bowel and bladder dysfunction. Anything that is under the control of nerves
starting in the brain can be affected by an ischemic event in the brain or a
hemorrhagic event. I mean, same deal, not enough blood getting to some of the
relevant nerves in whatever the clinical picture is inside the brain. When you
have strokes, this has stayed pretty steady over the years that about 87% of
them are ischemic, right? So just blood getting kind of squeezed off, hate to say it
that way, but blood kind of getting squeezed off like a garden hose and not
enough of that water is flowing through the garden hose or not enough of that
blood is flowing through the blood vessel, right, to reach the neural tissue
more distally. And about 13% of them are hemorrhagic. So a blood vessel bursts,
whether it's a hypertensive event causing like a putamen hemorrhage or maybe it's
like a berry aneurysm that's in the brain, right? A sacular aneurysm that is
just is weak. The walls are weak and it bursts. About 87% are ischemic and 13% are
hemorrhagic that stays pretty true over the years. Age, you got to know these
things for boards. They are going to ask you about this. So they're going to ask
you, you know, what is the most important non-modifiable risk factor? Unfortunately
in this century, we can't, you know, you can't modify your age. You can't just
dial back the clock. And so, so age is actually the most important non-modifiable
risk factor, something you can't change, right? You can't change, you can't change
how old you are. And so this is the most significant powerful risk factor. The older
you get, the more likely you are to have a stroke. And so the important, in terms of
things that you can modify, you can control, you can work to do things to lower your blood
pressure, you can exercise, you can eat right, you cannot smoke, you cannot, you know,
you can take your blood pressure medication. And so hypertension is actually the most
important, modifiable risk factor for having a stroke. If you have hypertension,
and especially if it goes on for long-term chronically, you're way more at risk
of having a stroke than somebody who's not hypertensive. Other risk factors that
you should be aware about are essentially spoiler, systemic, vascular disease
risk factors. That's the common theme among these risk factors. And that's
basically, you know, hypertension, smoking status, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, you
know, affecting the blood vessels, coronary artery disease, which basically goes along
with carotid stenosis as causing just gradual thrombosis of these arteries, these blood
vessels. Atrial fibrillation, you can have wall motion abnormalities in the heart that
will cause a blood to not flow properly and smoothly through the heart. Thus, blood
is kind of stasis static, right, inside the heart, not moving as much in so it clots. And
then your heart just throws that clot up into the brain and it lodges somewhere in the
brain very commonly. The middle cerebral artery, we will get to that. We'll talk about it.
Sedentary lifestyle is also a significant risk factor for having a stroke. And again,
systemic vascular disease is a very common theme among these things. And so as we mentioned,
about 87% of these are aschemic. When they're aschemic, you could have that cutting off of
that blood flow due to a lot of different causes. Okay, so you have embolism, you have
thrombosis, and you have lacuna strokes. The embolic strokes, these are sudden onset
of deficits where basically you have a clot that develops and then it dislodges and
it goes downstream from where it started. And it suddenly occludes a vessel downstream.
Okay, that's usually the heart in a patient with AFib. The heart will have wall motion abnormalities.
And because of that, the blood flow through the heart is not as smooth as it would
and be in a normal patient. And so you get the development of clots right there and those
clots get thrown up into the intracranial vasculature. And a lot of times they lodge in the
MCA, the middle cerebral artery. Okay, so really, really common is to have a cardio embolic
stroke getting thrown up to the brain and causing it left to right MCA in function.
That's a really common type of stroke. Thrombosis is the most common type of ischemic stroke
is just thrombosis. And that's just those systemic vascular disease risk factors that we
talked about, elevated cholesterol, hypertension, et cetera. Narrowing a blood vessel and producing
a clot which narrows that blood vessel and gradually occludes that vessel lumen. Okay,
you get gradual onset deficits with this. Often patients will actually go to sleep and
they'll wake up with these deficits. Okay, so it's a more gradual onset, not really unsure
of the exact time of that onset type of stroke. Whereas cardio embolic strokes are just really
sudden, just as that stroke hits the distal vasculature, or as that clot hit the distal vasculature,
you get sudden onset deficits in that case. Lecuner strokes are really tiny blood vessels
in the brain that become ischemic due to systemic vascular disease. And this isn't a hyper,
it's not a hemorrhagic event, but most often these Lecuner strokes are related to hypertension.
Most often they also happen in the putamen as well. That's where you get these Lecuner vessels,
Lecuner strokes, and you know, putamen thalamus internal capsule. Thalamus being the classic
example of a pure sensory stroke. Okay, and internal capsule, especially posterior limb
of internal capsule, being a great example of a pure motor stroke. Okay, a contralateral
pure motor stroke in that case. Hemorrhagic strokes, in the other hand, this is a blood vessel
bursting, and that's what causes the interruption of blood supply to a certain area of the brain.
Now, the blood vessel bursts could be a couple of different reasons. It could be a hyper-tensive
burst of that vessel, but commonly it's actually just a vascular abnormality, like a bury
aneurysm, okay, causing a subarachnoid hemorrhage. So in a subarachnoid hemorrhage, this is one
type of hemorrhagic stroke. A bury aneurysm, okay, a medial wall of the effect in the blood vessel
will cause the blood vessel wall to be weak, and thus you get an aneurysm that dilation of
the blood vessel due to the weak wall, and it will keep dilating and it will actually burst
at some point, usually in the circle of willis. In fact, the most common spot for a subarachnoid
hemorrhage due to a bury aneurysm rupture is actually at the ACOM, or the anterior communicating
artery. So ACOM is the first letter or the alphabet, and it's the most common type of subarachnoid
hemorrhage due to an ACOM aneurysm rupture. When you get a subarachnoid hemorrhage, this is the
worst headache of my life, classically. Sudden onset often during exertion, so if you have a
question about like a weight lifter, sudden, you know, doing a lift like a really heavy dead lift,
and suddenly they get the worst headache of their life, and next deafness and neurologic deficits,
you think subarachnoid hemorrhage in that case, and you'll get a non-contrast CT scan,
or a lumbar fracture to confirm it. PCOM is also another very common aneurysm site
posterior communicating artery, and we will draw this out the circle of willis, but when you get a
PCOM aneurysm, it's really important to know that this commonly causes a cranial nerve-3
compression, or oculomotor nerve compression, and when you get this cranial nerve-3 compression,
remember that the cranial nerve in a cross-section of that nerve, cranial nerve-3,
the outer part of that nerve has the parasympathetic fibers here, okay? The inner part of that has
the motor fibers, so when you start to get an aneurysm out here, okay, compressing that nerve,
what it's going to compress first is those parasympathetic fibers on the outside, which is why
the first thing you get is a blown pupil, okay? Sympathetic midriasis, midriasis, or pupil
dilation is driven by the sympathetic system, whereas myosis, or pupil constriction,
is caused by the parasympathetic fibers in the oculomotor nerve, cranial nerve-3,
thus, when you interrupt those parasympathetic fibers, you get a blown pupil, okay? You can't
constrict them anymore, so the first sign of an impending or growing aneurysm is that blown pupil,
okay? The second stuff, you start to compress further, you actually hit these oculomotor
motor fibers to the eye, thus, you cannot open your eye, the levator palpibre, that's controlled by
the oculomotor nerve, you can't open your eye, so you get toses, and you also get a down and out
gaze of that eye because of the paralysis of those oculomotor muscle fibers. This usually happens
classically in patient in their 40s or 50s, and subarachnobate hemorrhages, they're graded
clinically on this thing called a hunt and hess scale, the hunt and hess scale mercifully only
goes to five, it's one to five, and if you think about it, five is the worst, one is the best,
I think about it like this, one is the patient is roughly asymptomatic, and five is they're
totally in a coma, everything else is in between, so one is they're roughly asymptomatic, at grade two,
it's a headache, and a little bit of next stiffness, three is that, plus they're confused,
four is they are essentially drunk at that point with hemiparesis, totally unintelligible,
and in grade five they're in a coma, you'll see a lot of your neurosurgery colleagues
that on these patients you're consulted on, they'll talk about an h and h grade three,
or whatever the patient is, and this is, if you know this, you'll know what they're talking about,
basically, so I do want to hit this with hemorrhagic strokes, that these hemorrhagic stroke
patients, they do have increased acute mortality compared to ischemic strokes, so in that acute
period, they're more likely to die actually because of the stroke, but if they survive that first
initial acute period, they're actually more likely to have a better functional outcome than
aschemic stroke patients do, so you take that risk early on with hemorrhagic strokes, if you will,
to have a better functional prognosis later on, not that you choose the type of stroke that you
get, of course, the other type of hemorrhagic stroke is an ICH or IPH, if you will, that's an
interest cerebral hemorrhage or intraperencomal hemorrhage, and this is just basically your
hypertension that is so uncontrolled, it actually causes a vessel to burst, okay, this
this hypertensive hemorrhagic stroke usually happens in the putamen, most common site,
which will give you contralateral hemiplegia, okay, and you don't have to be exerting yourself while
this happens, it's usually sudden onset while you're just at rest, and these patients,
classically, get nausea vomiting and seizures as well. So what do you do in acute stroke management?
Often, PM and R doctors are not the first line of defense in patients having an acute stroke,
so some of this stuff can be tested on boards, but it's low yield, so I'm going to go through it
pretty quickly, okay, so when you first have an acute stroke, you want to do the ABCs,
airway breathing and circulation, make sure the patient's actually stable before you do all
their testing on them to figure out what's going on. What you're going to do is get a stat
head CT without contrast, that's probably the most important thing for you to know about this,
you want a stat head CT without contrast as your initial imaging study. If you order it with contrast,
on CT scan, bone, blood, and contrast, they all show up bright white on a CT scan, so if you have
a bunch of bright white stuff in the patient's brain on that scan, you're not going to be able to
tell if it's blood or contrast, so it's really useless to order it with contrast, you have to get
it without contrast, and anything that's bright white in the patient's brain perincomy is going to
be blood at that point, and that's how you diagnose a hemorrhagic stroke. If you don't see that
bright white stuff in their brain, then you think, okay, maybe they have an ischemic stroke, okay,
and that's where the MRI will show up and will help you, especially the T2 MRI.
We talked about this at, if you have an acute stroke, part of that initial management involves
high-dose aspirin for anti-platelet activity, so you keep that perfusion going in the brain.
IV libatalol is often a blood pressure medication of choice in ischemic strokes, you want to keep the
SPP under 220, and in hemorrhagic strokes, you want to keep the SPP under 180 because they just had
a burst blood vessel in their brain, so you're a lot more vigilant about keeping the blood pressure
down in hemorrhagic strokes. Versus ischemic strokes, you have a higher
permission level of their hypertension, if you will. Permissive hypertension, by the way,
we call it that because if you have a patient who lives at an SPP of 180, and then they had a
stroke, if you acutely lower them to normal tension, so like SPP 120, then you may just acutely
lower the perfusion of their brain and cause a worsened stroke at that point, so you want to
initially have permissive hypertension with a slow gradual return to normal tension goals over
the next few weeks, okay? If you see a patient on the acute rehab floor, it's really during that
acute rehab state, typically at least, that you'll start to lower them down towards normal tension,
and on discharge, especially from inpatient rehab, you want to have them at normal tension.
You really shouldn't be having them floating around at an SPP of 140 and saying, all right, great,
that's a lot lower than 220, so we're okay. No, you're actually doing them a disservice, and you
really do want to get your stroke patients to normal tension eventually. Yeah, if they have seizures
acutely, you'll give them IV, or as a pain, and that's usually enough, you can move on to
phenetoin if you need more backup for that. With acute strokes, a very, very important thing to
remember that is super testable, it's also very important for treating patients, but it's very
testable, right? It's very testable on a written or board exam, and that's these three things that
I have here, okay? These fun mathematics, right? We all go into physiatry to think about
numbers and mathematics and formulae, right? And so a few things I want you to remember are that you
want to keep the intracranial pressure of a patient, the ICP, you want to keep that value. Luckily,
these units are the same, right? Millimeters are mercury. You want to keep the ICP intracranial
pressure under 20. If you have too high of an intracranial pressure, you know, ICP, there's too much
pressure and swelling inside the brain, that is just not compatible with life, right? And you're
going to die with too high of ICP. And so you want to keep that ICP value under 20. What's very,
very important as well is you also want to not just keep pressures adequately low inside the skull,
you want to maintain perfusion, you want to maintain blood flow through the brain, right? Through
that neural tissue, so that it's adequately supplied with oxygen and nutrients. And so you want
that cerebral perfusion pressure or CPP to be greater than 60. That's the magic value there. You
want that greater than 60. That is very important for keeping someone alive and keeping neurons happy
and healthy inside the brain. How do you calculate that CPP, that cerebral perfusion pressure? It's
actually not that difficult. And I think you can manage it. It's actually just the mean arterial
pressure or map minus ICP, right? I mean, that makes sense if you think about that formula for a minute.
The difference of the mean arterial pressure inside the body and the pressure that's inside the
cranium, the head, that's going to be the blood pressure that's getting inside the brain there,
the cerebral perfusion pressure. You want that at least at least 60. And then you're going to have
adequate cerebral perfusion. There are things that we can do, measures we can take, of course,
to reduce intracranial pressure acutely. One thing is forced hyperventilation. That can be done,
it's not a great long-term option. It can certainly be done to acutely lower intracranial pressure
or ICP, but it's not a great long-term option. As you recall from medical school, that will cause
blood chemistry abnormalities, which are not healthful for the human body. You can use some IV
medications. You can elevate the head of the bed. That kind of goes without saying. If you think
about hanging someone from their leg, from their feet, that's the worst thing you can do for their
intracranial pressure. It's going to go sky high if you do that. It follows that the opposite,
elevating the head of the bed is going to promote fluid and blood drainage from the
brain and thus reduce ICP. You can elevate head of the bed. You can induce hypothermia. You can
also, of course, in acute cases, perhaps signs of imminent neurologic decompensation. You can have
immediate emergent neurosurgical cranial decompression, essentially, to reduce ICP acutely. If somebody
is about to decompensate, a very dangerous situation, so neurosurgeons can go in and, of course,
reduce pressure inside the brain. If somebody has an ischemic stroke, in an acute stroke management
situation, which most physiatrist will not be involved in, but you still have to know about this whole
continuum of care as a physiatrist, taking care of someone. You're going to want to know that
somebody can have, if it's an ischemic stroke, right? So not hemorrhagic. There's not a major
source of bleeding blood vessel burst that has caused their stroke. You can consider tissue
plasmonition activator or TPA. There's different versions of TPA. You may call it something else
at your institution, but they all are in the same class of medication called TPA. TPA is tissue
plasmonition activator. You know, this is your clot buster medicine, your antithrombolytic medicine
medication. And so if somebody has evidence of an ischemic stroke, there are exhaustive criteria
that neurologists really need to know about. Emergency medicine physicians, neurologists need to know
about in order to make the decision to go through that decision matrix and make the decision should
a patient get TPA or not. That is vastly unlikely, extremely unlikely that a physiatrist will ever
be involved in that decision making of whether or not to go forward with TPA. I mean, it's just not
going to be you. And so I don't bore you. I don't want you to fill your head with that the entire
criteria list. If you do go through them, they do make sense the TPA criteria. In general, what you
want to have is that there is evidence of a stroke taking place and it's an ischemic stroke,
not hemorrhagic. If it's hemorrhagic and you give somebody clot buster medicine, they're just
going to bleed even more. You're going to worsen their stroke and probably have them bleed elsewhere
in their body too. So, but if there's evidence of an ischemic stroke and there's of course no evidence
of intracranial hemorrhage on a head CT scan, which is a very quick scan that you can get done.
And the patient presents within a reasonable amount of time that has seemed to settle about
about the 4.5 hour window of symptom onset. Along with other inclusion criteria, your blood can't
be too thin, your INR can't be too high, et cetera. There's a bunch of other criteria that are
not within the scope of a physiatrist for decision making, but you should be generally aware of the
concepts that have presented here for when somebody might get TPA or not. I think that's important
to know. Despite, you'll probably not actually be making that decision. If it's an ischemic stroke,
you can also consider interventional thrombectomy, you know, a neurosurgeon or an interventional
neurologist perhaps could go in, the blood vessels themselves, thread a thrombectomy,
device up into the intracranial vessels and actually remove the clot from the circulation acutely.
And that can be done. You just go in and open up the vasculature in that fashion, retrieve the
clot, remove it from the body, and you can actually have dramatic neurologic improvements very quickly
with that, which can be really cool to see neurologic, you know, neurologic deficits
transforming acutely into neurologic improvement and restoration of function, which is very cool.
So if the patient had a subarachnoid hemorrhage or an intracerebral hemorrhage,
what are you going to do for them? Essentially, you want to do everything you can to keep the
pressure in their head low. So you're going to elevate the head of the bed. You are, you know,
you are going to eliminate any sources of strain for these patients that might increase their
BP, such as Valsalva maneuver, right? So if they're really straining to go to the bathroom,
that's going to be a really high Valsalva thing, increasing their intra-abdominal pressure,
thus increasing their ICP, thus in order to not have them strained, you give them stool softener,
okay, and laxatives and stuff. So that really helps with their intra-abdominal pressures and
ICP. You also just want to manually keep their BP low under 180, keep the ICP under 20, like we
discussed, and do these things to help with that. And in subarachnoid hemorrhages and ICHs, you also
give nymodapine for three weeks. And this is to prevent, it's a calcium channel blocker to prevent
secondary intracranial vasospasm due to blood. Anytime you bleed in the brain, blood is actually
really irritating to the direct brain tissue, and so it can cause a vasospasm when it's there.
So if you don't give nymodapine, then you can actually, and usually they're already on it by the
time they get to you, or they've completed their course by the time they get to you on in patient
rehab, but you give them the nymodapine, if you don't give it to them, then that blood is just
going to sit in their brain and potentially cause a vasospasm which could add an ischemic stroke
on top of their hemorrhagic stroke. And so, you know, you got to make sure that they had
nymodapine at some point, a good course of that to prevent that secondary vasospasm.
What you can do for AVMs, arteriovenous malformations, you can coil them, you can clip them,
you can remove the AVM, you can clip or coil the aneurysms, and basically just mechanically remove
them in that case, and that's also neurosurgical procedures.
Imaging-wise, we talked about an initial head CT without contrast, really quick study,
and so you really just want to rule out bleeding at that point. Blood is bright white on the
head CT, and then the fraction will be a dark area, but this usually takes one to two days for
that infarction to show up on CT. So if you are really highly suspicious of ischemic stroke,
you'll get an MRI of the brain. MRA will show its angiography, so that will show the vessels
and their patency, and help you if you're looking for intracranial vasculature as a source of thrombosis
and stenosis, basically a source of their stroke. So the contrast allows us to look at that neck
and intracranial vasculature, to look for AVMs or aneurysms or any kind of stenosis or occlusion.
When we look at an MRI, blood will be dark on a T2 MRI, but infarction is bright white,
so you look for the bright white signal on MRI, especially T2 MRI, and if you see bright white
in the brain on it, that's your ischemic stroke. Okay, because on T2 MRI, T2 is H2O, which T2
looks for water, water is a dima, ischemic strokes have a ton of a dima around the side of ischemia,
around the stroke, basically, you get a lot of a dima there, which is a lot of water,
and T2 is H2O, so you use a T2 MRI to look for those strokes, and they will show up bright white
on the MRI. Cardiac echo will look for a cardiac source of embolus, and so trans thoracic or
transesophageal echo will show you a cardiac embolus source, or wall motion abnormalities,
or patent-framinal valve, basically, which are all reasons a patient could send us a clot from
the heart to the brain. Lumbar puncture, lumbar puncture, rather, is also parts sometimes of a
acute stroke workups, and so you'll think about a lumbar puncture if you had a head CT that was
negative for blood, but you still suspect subarachnoid hemorrhage as a cause of the patient's stroke.
In that case, you can get a lumbar puncture, and it will show xanthochromia, which means yellow color,
and xanthochromia, or yellow color, just means in the CSF that there's just blood breakdown products
in there, and that will tell you, okay, why is there blood in the CSF? Oh, yeah, they had a hemorrhagic
stroke, so that's why you might do a lumbar puncture, which would indicate subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Carotid artery ultrasound is another way to look for carotid stenosis,
and that can help you manage carotid risk factors, basically, for stroke. Now, speaking of that
stuff, chronic stroke management, you think about an acute stroke, you think about a patient gets
worked up, they get to the emergency department, they have their scans, they get worked up for this,
you know, maybe they have a TPA administered, maybe they have clot retrieval, right?
You think about the acute phase of the stroke has passed, the patient is stabilized.
Well, you think about the reasons that they may have had their stroke. I mean, those reasons
are still there, right? The decades of having high blood pressure, of smoking, you know,
not having a sedentary lifestyle, perhaps, those risk factors are still there, and they can't
disappear overnight because you acutely treated the stroke, and so what you need to do is focus
really, really hard on preventing another one from happening. If you just had a stroke,
it's because you had risk factors, you know, come to a head and actually produce a stroke,
and you're still right there. I mean, you're still right there at that spot of your body,
not wanting to, but, you know, being primed to produce another stroke, right? You know,
depending on what that causes. And so we want to prevent another stroke from happening. This is
called secondary prevention. Primary prevention of stroke is where you're just trying to
prevent a stroke from happening in the first place. Once it's already happened, we say, okay,
let's prevent a second one from happening, and that's called secondary prevention. And so there
are different methods we use to have a patient, you know, successfully undergo secondary prevention
of a stroke. And what those are are basically, you know, have good blood pressure, you know, don't
smoke, be appropriately, and I coagulated if you need to live an active, healthy lifestyle,
have a normal BMI, you know, lots of veggies, normal blood sugar, cholesterol, you know, kind of,
you know, maintain these healthy things in the body that we try to do anyway, right? We try to
advise, anyway. And so what you want to do, that you want to know a couple things that are key
details about this. And so in secondary prevention, if cardiac embolism is the cause of the stroke,
that's when you're going to anti-coagulate a patient, right? Because they still have, you know,
theoretically wall-emotion abnormalities. Maybe they're being treated for their atrial fibrillation,
right? But you want to anti-coagulate your patient so that any of those wall-emotion abnormalities
of the heart do not produce another clot that can get thrown up, sent up to the brain. And so
you're going to use maybe Warfarin, right? That's common to use with a Golion R classically of two
to three. You may also use direct thrombin inhibitors, or factor 10A inhibitors, right? That's
commonly revoroxaban, a pixaban, maybe debigatran, and even edoxaban. These direct agents, you know,
which actually they don't all have 10A in their name, debigatran does not. It has GA in its name,
right? But, you know, these 10A inhibitors that can be used as well for anti-coagulation.
If it's a thrombotic stroke, you know, that's a thrombosis that has built up in the intracranial
vasculature, or, you know, the carotid arteries, for example, then you can use aspirin. If you do have
thromboembolic event, or thromboeblism from carotid stenosis, what's commonly recommended is an
aspirin diperidomal combination. Now, there is some, you know, there is some, you know, debate in the
literature about what do you do with carotid stenosis when it's symptomatic versus asymptomatic,
and what seems to be what surgeons, you know, like to do for these things is that if you have carotid
stenosis of at least 50% narrowing of that lumen, that vessel lumen, and the patient is
synerologically symptomatic, right? Then that's when you're going to consider carotid and
arterectomy, right? CEA, the surgical procedure. If the carotid stenosis is at least 70%
occluded, and the patient's asymptomatic, that's when you'll still also consider CEA, right?
But you can see there are different thresholds for when a surgeon might reasonably consider
surgery in these cases. Now, of course, long term, we already mentioned this, you want to do these
healthy human being things, you want to maintain normal tension, that's very important, that's
super important. You want to have a healthful diet, lots of veggies, right? Normal blood sugar and
cholesterol, active lifestyle with regular aerobic exercise, and you want to not smoke, you want to
have a normal BMI. What's also very key, like mega high yield for you to know, you have to know
as a physiatrist, I don't care what you end up practicing inside physiatry, but you should know
that most neurologic recovery, not necessarily functional recovery, but most actual neurologic
recovery in a stroke will take place within that first three to six months. You have to know that,
and that's something you can counsel your patients on as you're talking to patients in stroke rehab.
And that can be a source of hope too, you know, it's not necessarily that after six months you're
done, that's it. Probably neurologically, there's not going to be much movement, you know,
much recovery beyond that point, but functionally, they can still benefit from different rehabilitation
techniques and functional strategies for getting around and transferring and doing, again,
normal human being things. But neurologically, on the flip side of that, if you're at that six
month mark, you know, it might be kind of what you're dealing with at that point, but
but if you're if you're early on in your stroke, that can be a source of hope for patients
to hear that, hey, I'm only two weeks into this, you know, and I'm already X percent better,
you know, I've got a, I've got a much longer road ahead of me of neurologic recovery and that
can help motivate patients through their inpatient rehab or through the, or whatever their
rehabilitation process is to continue to fight and continue to struggle and try.
You know, along those lines, it's often appropriate for the physiatrists to have a patient
hope for the best, but prepare for the worst. So you can't just say, hey, you're one week out,
you're two weeks out, and you'll get better, you know, whatever, you know, tell them, hey,
it's great to hope that we get everything back, but let's prepare for the worst just in case.
And that's that's I think that's a good appropriate strategy.
You know, and when we're talking about neurologic recovery, we're of course talking about motor,
you know, swaddling bowel bladder function, you know, speech function. These are the things that we
are referring to. The Circle of Willis. Now, we always talk about the Circle of Willis as if it's
this gospel truth that everybody has their own Circle of Willis, and it never changes from that.
So it really is classic anatomy in the brain, but it's actually not common. Most people don't
actually have the perfect Circle of Willis. There's always variations in how the vessels arrange
themselves and have collateral vasculature and all that, but so we'll talk about the classic
Circle of Willis, but just know that most of your patients probably don't have a perfectly formed
Circle of Willis, and that's normal. The Circle of Willis is composed of anterior and posterior
circulation systems. The posterior one is called vertebral basilar or VBS as well, and the anterior
circulation is just called, you know, anterior circulation or the carotid circulation if you want.
We're going to draw this out. Okay, we'll talk about a few spots where things can go wrong with
this. So Circle of Willis, and basically starts down here, you have two vertebral arteries that come
from below, like that. Here's your other one here, vertebral artery, and this is also a vertebral
artery. Now, before they join, they join like that, basically, and they go up. Before they join,
they have these branches that come down like this, and that forms the anterior spinal artery,
which for most of the spinal cord, it's actually going to give you the blood supply to the anterior
two-thirds of the spinal cord. So most of the spinal cord, basically, the arterial supply comes from
this little anterior spinal artery alone, which arises from bilateral vertebral arteries. Okay,
so the vertebral arteries come together. Okay, and this is that posterior circulation,
if you will. They come together to form the basilar artery. Okay, the basilar artery is right here.
We'll actually make that a larger B. If the basilar artery is interrupted, remember that's
called locked-in syndrome, and that's the patient can move their eyes up and down, but other than
that, they have, and they're totally conscious. This is all sub-cortical, right? It's brainstem.
They're totally conscious, but they're totally locked in and trapped in their body, and all they
can do is move their eyes up and down. That's basilar artery, artery occlusion syndrome is what
that is. But before the vertebral arteries come together, they do release. They have another
branch called the peca, or posterior inferior cerebellar artery, peca, and then after they come
together, they have aika that comes off, or aika, or aika, however you like to call it.
Okay, I like to call it aika. I can remember it a little bit better that way. Peca comes off before
the vertebral arteries come together, and aika comes off right after, so it comes off the basilar
artery, basically. I want you guys to know that vertebral artery, and peca occlusion of these
can cause a lateral medullary syndrome, or wallenberg syndrome. It's usually a vertebral artery,
or peca lesion in that case. We talked about basilar artery causing a locked-in syndrome.
So we have these vessels that come off, and remember, this is the same on the other side here.
I just choosing not to draw them for simplicity, but these vessels do come off. We won't label them,
but we'll draw them here. So basilar artery, this is going to go a little bit higher to give us
some room here. Now if basilar artery causes a pontine stroke, or locked-in syndrome,
remember, you do have these pontine branches that come off the basilar artery. It's not just like
sitting there. There's feet or branches that come off that feed the ponds. So that means then that
what brain structure must be here? Well, your ponds. Your ponds actually sits right here. This is
basically your ponds right here. Your medulla is actually going to be below the ponds. Okay,
remember, it's mid-brain ponds medulla. Okay, is the order that these things go in.
And so you can kind of almost draw their shadows here to see where the actual brain stem itself
is where it sits. And this makes sense if medulla is here, and you know, that's why you get a
peca interruption, or vertebral artery interruption, causing lateral medullary syndrome,
because the lateral medulla is right there, where these both are basically. We will move on.
So when you get here, we're going to even extend this basilar artery even higher.
When you get here, you get one artery coming off called the superior cerebellar artery,
and that also, that's basically the final artery here that feeds the cerebellum. These are,
this is anterior inferior cerebellar artery. We talked about peca, and this is superior cerebellar
artery. So also, occlusion of any of these can give you cerebellar deficits, which are typically
Ipsilateral deficits, or the patient falls to the side of the legion. Okay, so think about cerebellum
involvement, or balance, ataxia type symptoms, with occlusion of these vessels. Okay, so superior
cerebellar artery comes off, and then what you get is actually, you get PCA posterior cerebral
artery. That's a major cerebral artery. Okay, it really hits the posterior and inferior aspects of
the brain. But also coming off here, I'm going to draw this right here. This is PCOM,
posterior communicating artery. Okay, this is a really important one. PCOM tends to get aneurysms
that come off it. Okay, less commonly than ACOM does, but nevertheless, you do get aneurysms coming
off PCOM. Okay, and again, this stuff happens on the other side as well for symmetry. So PCOM,
this is communicating. What is it communicating with? It's communicating with the anterior circulation.
Anterior circulation comes all the way here, and if you know about this, then you'll know that
this vessel here is the internal carotid artery. Okay, internal carotid artery comes all the way up,
and it's the source of the anterior circulation here. It comes up, and what it does,
is it's basically like a plus sign as well how I think of it, is that ICA comes in, and all
these branches come off it right here. Okay, and this branch coming off to the right here is MCA,
the middle cerebral artery. That's probably the most famous intracranial vessel, as it, as
occlusion of it, tends to result in a lot of strokes, really common strokes actually. Left MCA
strokes in particular will give you aphasia, which is a language deficit if you recall. It's not
a dysarthria type thing. It's not a motor deficit. It's actually a higher level language processing
deficit is what aphasia is. So MCA strokes, left MCA strokes will give you various types of
aphasia, which will go over in this chapter, but also typically hand weakness and facial
droop will draw brain territories to make that make sense, but that's what MCA strokes will cause.
This right here is the ACA, or the anterior cerebral artery. We've hit all three of our major
major cerebral arteries, now the ACA, the MCA, and the PCA, and the ACA will command the anterior
kind of anero-medial brain structures, which will give you most importantly leg strength.
Okay, your motor homunculus is actually, this is a coronal view of the left side of the brain.
But if you think about that homunculus, we'll imagine if you will, this is the patient's
but if you will, this is their torso coming off here. Another wonderful drawing for you guys.
This is their torso, okay, and their arm and their hand is like this, okay, on the cortex itself,
okay, so this is medial, and this is lateral. It's like you're looking at a person,
you're seeing a coronal slice of their brain. The hand has a huge amount of motor, motor territory
on the brain, because we do a lot of fine coordinated movements with our hands, and so we need a lot
of neuronal representation on the brain for that. The face, by the way, is we're not even going to
attempt to draw a good face, we're just going to do that. This is the face here, okay, so, by the way,
this is leg, and this is their foot here, okay, it's like a talent in this case. So,
this is the motor homunculus, this is what it looks like in terms of motor command, so the ACA
territory is going to be this stuff for the most part, this, that's going to be your ACA territory.
So if this territory here becomes infarcted, then what's going to be affected is the patient's
leg strength, the contralateral leg strength, okay, it's going to be affected. Their hand strength
and aphasia and facial group is going to be affected much less, so because the infarction
territory is here, it's going to have to spread a long way to reach this stuff over here.
This stuff over here, by the way, is commanded by the MCA, okay, so MCA strokes are really this
territory here. When I think of PCA, I think of this down here, okay, posterior cerebral artery,
which is going to give you a lot of visual deficits and a cerebellar deficits as well.
If you have a PCA artery occlusion, okay, so this, in this coronal view of the brain, the ACA
territory is here, the MCA territory is here, and the PCA territory is this. So MCA strokes,
for example, on this left side of the brain, the left MCA stroke would really give you a
profound hand weakness, okay, and impaired coordination, but also a facial group on that side,
along with aphasia. And this really explains why they have that clinical presentation that they
do. These MCA strokes also tend to have faster recovery of their leg strength, and you can see
why is because the leg strength is supplied by a different artery that still has blood flow going
to those areas of the brain. Now, to finish off our circle of willis here, I've been talking a lot
about this ACOM, and ACOM is right here. It's the anterior communicating artery, okay, so it connects
the two PCOM connects the posterior and the anterior circulation, like that, and ACOM connects
the two ACA's together, okay. So these arteries are great to provide collateral circulation.
One patient's severity of stroke may vary from another patient's due to good collateral circulation.
Some patients will lack an ACOM here, and that can be really, really bad if you have an
occlusion of one ACA, and there's no collateral circulation to help a profusion of that side,
and that can be a really profound deficit. But if they have great collateral circulation,
you can sometimes make up the deficit by shunting blood to the other side via the ACOM, so that
can be really useful. This is your circle of willis. It really does help to draw this out
several times and just make it known cold to you, because this will help you when you're thinking
about brainstem syndromes, and where the patient's lesion is, and perhaps what artery is included.
Knowing this cold can be really, really beneficial and can help you knock out those questions in a
few seconds rather than five minutes when you're taking the test. Okay, so that's our circle of willis.
Remember, this is a classic circle of willis. It's not a common circle of willis. We talked about
that, cerebral vascular territories. We actually talked a little bit about this already. The ACA
commands the leg, the contralateral leg muscles and executive function. When you get
commonly, when you get bilateral ACA strokes, you'll often have a lot of bowel and bladder abnormalities
and impairment and bowel and bladder function, as well as impaired initiation or abulia type stuff.
Okay, we talked about where that territory is. MCA, this is mostly a face and upper
extremity muscles, language, aphasia, right, and spatial perception. If you get a right MCA stroke,
we often see a left heming neglect is what we call it. If you have this side here,
okay, you get that right MCA stroke like that. Well, your contralateral left side of your body is
represented right here, okay? And this is more spatial awareness type stuff here in terms of where
this location is in the parietal lobe. And so you'll often, if this is lesioned, you often, the
patient will often not even recognize the left side of their body and they will thus neglect it.
And that can be really problematic if they were trying to rehab that left side and they won't even
acknowledge that it exists. So often these patients get a left heming neglect and with intact
language because they're left side of their brain, which is the most typical dominant language
location of most people that is intact in the right side, MCA strokes. And PCA, we talked about
mostly cerebellar and visual cortices, so visual abnormalities like a homonymous hemianopsia is the
most, I guess, popular deficit in a PCA stroke. We kind of drew these out already and we will go
ahead and move on to CSF flow, cerebrospinal fluid. So cerebrospinal fluid can be tested on and
typically with CSF flow is what you'll do is I think we almost ran out of our room. We can try to
use this over here, I guess. With the CSF flow, it helps to look at it in terms of another frontal
view or coronal view, if you will. And what it does is the CSF actually starts in this area
called the choroid plexus. And those are the cells that actually produce the CSF, okay?
The cushioning fluid around your brain is spinal cord. Choroid plexus produces the CSF
from the lateral ventricles, okay? So we will start our journey there. The choroid plexus starts
it in the lateral ventricles, so it kind of looks like this type of thing. This is a coronal view,
remember? We will do one of these. Most complicated drawing I have done. All right, so lateral ventricle,
the lateral ventricle. This is the right side and the left side if we're looking at the patient.
This right here is the fragment of Monroe, okay? The CSF flows downward through this
fragment of Monroe into the third ventricle, okay? It goes into the third ventricle.
And from there, it goes through the cerebral aqueduct, which is this straight line,
down into the fourth ventricle, okay? Into the fourth ventricle here. Now from this fourth ventricle,
there's basically three phenomena that it can go through, okay? You have the two lateral
phenomena of Lushka. It's a lateral Lushka. I will write that one out.
And I may have spelled that wrong. There might not be a C in there, but, you know, you're
relevant at this point, Lushka, the phenomena of Lushka, and immediately you have the
fragment of Magendi, okay? And I guess we can do that person's service by writing their name out.
If you can even read that, Magendi and Lushka, okay? Medial, Magendi, lateral, Lushka.
And basically, you have your kind of brainstem and spinal cord right here, okay?
So the CSF, if it goes to the fragment of Magendi and Lushka, it will flow around the spinal
cord like that, okay? And Magendi is going to be behind it in this case. The CSF flows around it,
and what it does is it gets to the bottom. It loops around the spinal cord, it comes all the
way back up and gets into the lateral ventricle again, okay? And it circulates around like that,
and that's your CSF flow, okay? This here, we call this the subarachnoid space, okay?
When it's around the spinal cord like this.
All right, that's your CSF flow. We'll go ahead and move on to brainstem anatomy.
So brainstem anatomy. Brainstem anatomy can be very intimidating, especially if you're a new
medical student or a new PGY2 to PM&R. It seems like it's really complicated and you can never
learn it, but I promise we can simplify it, and if I can do it, you can do it. And we can actually
make brainstem anatomy and localizing brainstem lesions really simple. So we'll start here. The
brainstem, remember, it's the midbrain, the ponds, okay, and the medulla. Now midbrain ponds medulla,
okay? That's what we have here. So when we do the brainstem and we try to localize
where lesions are in the brainstem based on physical exam, what we do is we use what's called
the rule of force, the brainstem rule of force. There was a guy named Peter Gates in 2005.
He actually published a paper that simplifies brainstem lesions and how to localize lesions
using what he called the rule of force. So we're using this guy's strategy here because it's
really, really effective for simplifying brainstem strokes for all of us. And so the rule of force
is basically this. You have four, you have four cranial nerve nuclei per region of the brainstem,
okay? So there's four in the midbrain, four in the ponds, and four in the medulla, okay? Which
means cranial nerves one through four are in the medulla. I'm sorry, in the midbrain, cranial
nerves one through four are in the midbrain. The next five through eight are in the ponds,
and the next cranial nerves, their nuclei, are actually in the medulla, okay? Nine through 12.
So cranial nerves one through four are found in the midbrain, five through eight in the ponds,
and nine through 12 in the medulla. Which means if you're thinking, if you look at the patient,
and when they stick their tongue out, that tongue deviates to one side of their body, okay?
Essentially they're licking their wounds, if you will. That tongue deviates to one side,
you're thinking of a cranial nerve 12 lesion in that case, okay? A hypoglossal or a hypoglossal
nerve palsy. Which means if you're thinking of cranial nerve 12 lesion, what you can say in that
case is, huh? Yeah, their lesion must be in the medulla, and you'll be right in that case
that their lesion is in the medulla. So you already eliminated two-thirds of the brainstem
basically, and you know it's in the medulla somewhere, and there's further localizing that you can
do based on that. But part of this, a rule of force here, that can really help you knowing
exactly where the brainstem nuclei are. I will say the caveat in the midbrain here, cranial nerves
one and two are really more like in the brain itself rather than in the brainstem. So it's really
cranial nerves three and four that we find here. But for the purposes of this mnemonic here,
just thinking that, you know, one through four, five through eight, and nine through twelve
are in those regions that can really help you to localize things in the future. So
we talked about our nuclei. There's also four structures that start with m, and these are
medial, okay? These are medial in the brainstem here, which means they're along this axis right
here, okay? The midline basically. There are also four structures that start with s, and these
are to the side or lateral in the brainstem. In other words, they're going to be along here,
this line here, okay? So in this way, you'll be able to tell via what cranial nerve nuclei are
damaged, you'll be able to tell what latitude are we at, and via your m and your s structures,
you'll be able to tell what longitude we're at, okay? You know your latitudes via the cranial
nerves and the longitudes via the medial and side structures, okay? So in this way, you can actually
pinpoint exactly, aha, the lesions right here, lateral, lateral medillary syndrome, okay?
Or medial medillary syndrome, something like that, you can be able to tell using your axes here.
So what are these axes in terms of m and s? The four medial structures that are in the midline,
okay? m for midline or medial, they're actually the motor pathway, the cortical spinal tract,
right? And that's running, you know, all along here, cortical spinal tract, your motor pathway,
and there's, they're on both sides here for completeness sake. Cortical spinal tract, you also have,
and that, you know, lesion of the cortical spinal tract on one side here will give you
contralateral hemiparesis, or contralateral hemiplegia. The medial lemniscus is your touch pathway
if you will, vibration and proprioception. That's also a midline structure here, and so that's
going to give you contralateral loss of touch and proprioception, okay? Light touch and proprioception
and vibration, if you have a lesion of that. You also have the mlf or the medial longitudinal
vesiculus. And lesion of the mlf is common in multiple sclerosis or ms patients. They'll
get a lesion of the mlf, which will cause an epsilonateral internuclear ophthalmoplesia.
And in that case, if you have an internuclear ophthalmoplesia, if you have it on the left side,
and you ask the patient to look to the right, you ask them to adduct this eye. They're left eye.
It's a left-sided lesion, so their left eye cannot adduct to the other side when you ask
them to, but the right eye will just nice tagmize. Basically, that's my drawing with my
stagmus, okay? The right eye will cause, will have nice tagmus, and the left eye will not
adduct to the other side, because you have an epsilonateral internuclear ophthalmoplesia,
because of a lesion to the epsilonateral mlf medial longitudinal vesiculus. So that's also a
midline structure here. The last or the fourth midline structure is the motor nuclei of cranial
nerves 3, 4, 6, and 12. These motor nuclei, they're in the midline, okay? You know that 3 and 4,
where are we going to find those? We're going to find those right here. Midline in the midbrain,
6, where is that going to be? It's going to be in the ponds, and it's going to be in the midline,
because it's an m structure. Motor nuclei of cranial nerves, it's going to be in the ponds, 12,
it's going to be down here in the medulla, right here, okay? So motor nuclei of cranial nerves,
3, 4, 6, and 12 are in the midline here. The way you remember what these are is they all
12 divides evenly into all of them, okay? 12 divided by 2 is 6, 12 divided by 3 is 4, 12 divided by 4
is 3, okay? So 12 divides evenly into all of them, and that's how you know that it's 3, 4, 6, and 12,
that are your medial cranial nerve nuclei, or the finally rounding out those medial 4M structures.
The S structures, what are those? You might imagine it's going to be a lot of sensory stuff,
so we'll go ahead and start with the spinal philamic tract, okay? That's laterally here,
okay? It runs laterally, the spinal philamic tract, so that spinal philamic tract,
lesion of that will give you contralateral body loss, not in the face, but in the body
of pain and temperature sensation, okay? Contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation,
if you lesion the spinal philamic tract on one side. The other structures that we have are the
spinal cerebellar tract, okay? And that runs along the lateral aspect here too.
Lesion of this spinal cerebellar tract is cerebellum is in the name, so it's actually going to give you
Ipsilateral cerebellar ataxia, essentially Ipsilateral ataxia, or falling towards the side of the lesion.
And we also have one of our F structures is the sensory nucleus of cranial nerve 5, which means
this is a cranial nerve, so it's going to be an Ipsilateral deficit, okay? And so the lesion of
the sensory nucleus of cranial nerve 5, okay? That's going to be more in the ponds, right? We're
talking about cranial nerve 5 here. It's going to be in the ponds, and it's going to be a lateral
structure, okay? And it's going to cause Ipsilateral loss of pain and temperature sensation on the face,
so that's what you'll get in those patients if that's interrupted, more lateral pontine stuff.
If you have a, finally, a sympathetic interruption, the sympathetic pathway is the final S structure in
the lateral aspect of the brainstem, and thus if you have interruption of the sympathetic pathway here,
you'll have an Ipsilateral hornar syndrome take place, okay? And that's basically TOSIS,
myosis, and anhydrosis, that's Ipsilateral. So using all of these here, you can localize
anywhere in the brainstem where the lesion is based on what the patient shows you on physical exam,
okay? Now in text form, this is what all that is here, okay? The brainstem rule of 4.
For cranial nerve nuclei, per segment of the brainstem, we talked about that. We talked about in
the midbrain 1 through 4, okay? Cranial nerve 1 through 4, 5 through 8 being in the ponds,
and 9 through 12 being in the medulla, okay? There are four midline structures that start with M,
motor pathway, or cortical spinal tract, right? Medial lemniscus, or touch pathway, right?
Medial longitudinal vesiculus, that internuclear ophthalmoplesia thing, which commonly happens in
MS patients, and motor nuclei of cranial nerves, 3, 4, 6, and 12, okay? Those are midline structures
that start with M. Four side structures or lateral structures in the brainstem start with S,
spinal philamics, spinal cerebellars, sensory nucleus of cranial nerve 5, and your sympathetics.
And we talked about four motor nuclei as well. Using these rules, you know your latitudes and
longitudes, you can identify exactly where someone's lesion is. Really take the time to learn this
because once you do, you will know the brainstem cold, and it's really impressive to be able to
kind of whip this out and just immediately localize where someone's lesion is based on physical
exam. It can be really impressive, and it will help you immensely on tests. I think I mentioned
this earlier. It's basically the difference between answering a question in five minutes and
being uncertain about it, or answering it in 10 seconds. So, you know, different strokes. We
talked about this already, but now, you know, here's some of it in text form for you. ACA strokes
are a contralateral leg weakness and numbness distilled proximal, or distal greater than proximal
morso. You'll get incontinence, and if you're bilateral, you'll have impaired executive function,
and you'll have more personality deficits with that. The MCA stroke, we talked about this,
contralateral face arm, hand weakness, and numbness with either aphasia or hymenid elect, okay?
And aphasia, it's on the left side of the brain, okay? With aphasia, we'll talk about an aphasia
tree coming up here really soon. These MCA strokes are very commonly due to cardiac
amboli, okay? Due to AFib, that clot from the heart will actually just dislodge in the heart
and go straight up into the middle cerebral artery, okay? It's really, really popular destination
for those heart clots. But, getting back to aphasia here, with your MCA, the MCA itself, if you draw
a sagittal view, we're going to attempt that this is a, we're going to pretend this is a good
sagittal view of the brain. If you draw this, you actually have the MCA coming up, and it has
these like superior branches and inferior divisions here. So you have an inferior division and a
superior division. A superior division MCA stroke is more likely to give you a broca aphasia,
okay? Which is also called an expressive aphasia. You have trouble expressing words.
It'll give you contralateral upper limb weakness and broca aphasia with superior division MCA strokes.
Conversely, inferior division, these ones right here, we're more likely to give you a
vanica aphasia, okay? Or a receptive aphasia, in which case you can't actually comprehend. You have
impaired comprehension, but you have intact fluency. So you can, you know, you have that word salad
basically. Whereinica's word salad. So you have a normal fluency, a great verbal output,
it just none of it makes sense because you can't comprehend anything. That's a vanica aphasia.
So it can give you that aphasia, or if it's on the right side, think about a contralateral
having to collect with those inferior division MCA strokes. Okay, aphasia. Similarly to the
brainstem, aphasia seems complicated, but once you practice it, it's actually really easy,
okay? Because you can break it down into three main components basically, which are fluency,
comprehension, and repetition, okay? And sometimes naming comes into there. If you can't name
things, it's called aonomia. Sometimes that comes into play there, but it's really fluency,
comprehension, and repetition. And that's how you characterize aphasia based on if they can do
these things or not. Practice the aphasia tree, which we're about to do to get good at it, okay?
Now a broca aphasia is also called an expressive aphasia. Broca's area is typically found on the
inferior frontal gyros. It's basically anterior to the motor strip on the brain. And so this is how
that language center feeds into the motor areas to produce words. But broca's aphasia is a
non-fluent aphasia, which means you have really effort, effortful speech. You have not good
verbal output basically. It's really tough for you to get individual words out. There's so much
tension and difficulty and effort associated with your speech that you're really struggling just
to get a single word out. You know what you want to say, but it's just extremely hard for you to
say it. This often helps if you go on YouTube and look at each one of these aphasias to try to
really have it stick in your head, but it's a non-fluent aphasia. Whereas a fluent, if you have
fluent speech words come really easily. Whether or not those words make sense, they come really easily
and you're really well articulated with those words. But if you're non-fluent, it's very, very
difficult to produce a single word. So broca aphasia is an expressive aphasia with non-fluency,
but you can comprehend things. You can comprehend and follow directions that someone's telling you
and you can't repeat because you just, again, you have not fluent. It's really hard to get words
out in a broca aphasia. You can't repeat things in a trans-cortical motor aphasia. That's basically
a broca aphasia, but you can repeat. That's it. It's the only difference, okay? There's some different
areas of the brain that are lesioned in that case. It's not high yield for you to know what they are,
but you're non-fluent. You can comprehend things and you can repeat, okay? I think about this,
in any trans-cortical aphasia, you can repeat things, okay? If you look down here trans-cortical
sensory, you can repeat trans-cortical motor, you can repeat. The way I think about that is I think
of like trans-cortical, like a trans-continental railroad. You can repeat that trip several times.
As many times as you want, you can go from New York to San Francisco and you can say,
I want to repeat that trip and go back. You can obviously, obviously, you can get back on that
train, go right back to New York and you've repeated your trip, basically. So I think about trans-cortical,
a trans-continental railroad passenger can repeat their trip if they want, and that train does
repeat that trip all the time, just going back and forth between New York and San Francisco.
It will repeat its trip, thus trans-cortical patients can repeat things, and that really helps
you a lot. You will get a lot of questions on practice question banks, and also the actual
board exam itself with patients who either can or can't repeat, and sometimes the correct answer
is a trans-cortical aphasia, which is more higher level knowledge in terms of aphasia. Most people
will probably hope to get a simple broker or a verinica question, but sometimes the correct answer
is in fact a trans-cortical aphasia, and so knowing that trans-cortical patients can repeat,
they can always repeat, that will really help you get that answer correct. So trans-cortical motor
is basically a broker aphasia where they can repeat. Verinica aphasia on the other hand, you think
about verinica's word salad, I call it verinica to try to sound like a true German, but yeah,
verinica's word salad, or verinica's word salad if you will. It's a word salad, okay, so they're
fluent, but unfortunately they can't comprehend anything, so their words don't make any sense.
It's really profound if you've ever treated a verinica aphasia patient, the way they talk, the
way they spit out that word salad, but none of it makes sense, and they can't repeat anything
as well. However, a trans-cortical sensory aphasia is the same thing as a verinica aphasia,
only they can repeat, okay. Mixed trans-cortical is pretty low yield, and you're very unlikely to
get a question on that. A conduction aphasia on the other hand is where you can do everything,
but you just can't repeat anything, okay. That's a conduction aphasia. Basically, if you look
at a sagittal view of someone's brain, Broca is here, verinica is here, you have damage to the
arqueuit vesiculus between the two. If that is damaged, then you can't perceive language here,
and then send it to here to repeat that. If somebody tells you words, you interpret it here,
send it over here towards Broca's area to actually try to repeat it. If this is damaged,
then you can't repeat it. However, you can comprehend things, and you can produce your own language,
it's just that the connection between the two is severed, and that's the arqueuit vesiculus
being damaged. Thus, you cannot repeat, but you can do everything else in a conduction aphasia.
Let's draw this out. I took the liberty of not putting you through the torture of watching
me write everything here. You can break down aphasia, remember, into fluent. If aphasia is like
up here, aphasia, it splits like this, into fluent and non-fluent sections. We'll start with
the fluent section here. You always think about three main components. Fluency, comprehension,
and repetition. I added naming down here because that helps. We'll talk about that right now.
So, fluency, let's think about this. Let's just go across and do all these. If you're fluent,
great, you're getting words out. What do you not have? You probably don't have a broca
aphasia, right? Because you're fluent, and broca is the same essentially as transcortical motor,
only you can't repeat in broca. So, those are both non-fluent, so it's probably neither of those.
You're fluent, so it's probably not a global aphasia where you can't do anything at all.
So, let's go down this. You're fluent. Now you ask the question, okay, we've narrowed it down a
little bit. Can we comprehend, or can we not comprehend? Let's say you're fluent, and you can
comprehend. Let's say you can also repeat, and let's say you can also name things. What aphasia
are you there? You're actually normal in this case, okay? And so, if you're fluent, you can comprehend,
you can repeat, and you can name things you're normal. If you can do everything, you just can't name
anything that's called anomia, or anomic aphasia, okay? If you're fluent, you can comprehend,
but you just can't repeat anything, what is that going to be? That's going to be a conduction
aphasia, okay? This is your conduction aphasia here. You're fluent, you can comprehend, you just
can't repeat anything. That's a conduction aphasia. If you're fluent, but you can't comprehend
anything, okay? You're fluent, you can't comprehend, and you cannot repeat. We'll start there.
You're fluent, but you can't comprehend. Nothing makes sense, and you can't repeat anything. That
is a varanico aphasia, all right? What if you're fluent? You can't comprehend, but you can repeat
things. What kinds of people can repeat things? People who want to repeat their trip on the
transcontinental railroad, okay? When that was built. Thus, this is a transcortical, okay? Remember,
it's the brother or the sister, if you will, of the varanico aphasia, so it's transcortical sensory,
transcort sensory, okay? And they're right next to each other, okay? So they're basically the same
thing. They only differ in repetition, okay? Now, we just nailed down a few of these aphasia. Let's
go to the other side. What if you're non-fluid? Okay, you have more verbal output, really output,
really effortful speech. You can comprehend things. You just can't repeat anything that all that
is going to be your broca aphasia, okay? Now, remember, what is the brother or the sister of broca
aphasia? It's transcortical motor, okay? So we know that's going to go in here. Now, what is that
again? You're not fluent. You can comprehend, and you can repeat. Ah, okay, so it's a transcortical
something, and we know broca is right here, so this is transcortical motor, okay? Let's get down to
the rest of these. Non-fluid aphasia. You cannot comprehend. So you have really poor verbal output.
You're not fluent. You can't comprehend. You can't repeat anything. Gosh, you can't do anything.
Well, we call that a global aphasia, okay? If you literally can't do anything at all, you're
globally aphasic. That is a horribly impaired patient, and it's really, really unfortunate.
If you're non-fluid, if you cannot comprehend or last one here, you're non-fluid, you cannot
comprehend, but you can repeat. This is that one where we call it mixed transcortical basically.
Mixed transcortical. Kind of less important for you to know. Really, I want you to know all the
other ones, okay? Because you will be asked on any one of these, okay? Probably not a normal patient,
but any other one of these, okay? You're a pretty high yield for you to know.
So aphasia treatment is really hard, okay? We try to do all sorts of things like melodic intonation
therapy and dopaminergic agents and speech therapy, but really it's a wait and see type thing.
Speech therapy is your central therapeutic approach to treating aphasia. Just getting them
using their speech muscles, if you will, in their brain and challenging that patient to redevelop
a normal speech and thought patterns, okay? Very, very difficult, especially when you have
comprehension deficits. It's really, really hard to get a patient to follow directions and
participate in the aphasia treatment and actually get better with that. Melotic intonation therapy
is sometimes asked in terms of questions, and what they want you to know is which aphasia to use
that for. You use melodic intonation therapy for broca aphasia, okay? Melotic intonation therapy,
you actually sing with your speech and that helps recruit the right side of the brain, which is
more melodic, which is more of your melodic processing goes on, in terms of melody and music and
all that. So you recruit the right side of the brain to help with left-sided speech production,
which is impaired. So we use melodic intonation therapy or MIT in broca aphasia.
PCA strokes. Okay, we talked about this a little bit already. PCA strokes, it's mostly the visual
cortex, cerebellum, and midbrain, okay? You know the circle of willis at this point, you know the
brain stem anatomy at this point that should make sense to you. So the deficits that we get are
vision, coordination, and obviously brain stem findings. Remember your vision pathway to
localized lesions here. Typically what you'll get is a contralateral homonomous hemianopsia.
That's a common buzz word used with these, okay? When you have a lesion to one side of the brain,
especially in PCA territory, and often in MCA territory as well, you will get a contralateral
homonomous hemianopsia. Don't forget if you get an optic chiasm lesion, that's bi-temporal hemianopsia.
Sometimes you can get asked about quadrantonopsia, but that is rare, and I really don't expect you
to actually get asked about that, so we're not going to really talk about that too much. You should
know that Anton syndrome is a thing, and this is where patients will have PCA lesions, causing
them to have bilateral visual cortex strokes. And so the patient, they can ocularly see, but they
can't cortically see in their visual cortex if that makes sense, and this leads to what we call
cortical blindness, all right? So their eyes can see, but their brains can't see. They can't actually
process what their eyes are giving them, thus their cortex is blind. And what happens is patient
actually will deny that this blindness is happening. They're adamant that they can see, and that they
know what's going on and everything, but if you test them, they can't see a dang thing. And that's
called Anton syndrome, where they have blindness with a denial of that blindness, and it's due to
cortical blindness, basically. Lecuna strokes. Lecuna strokes often give you pure lesions,
okay? Pure motor or pure sensory lesion. Famously, you'll talk about a posterior limb of the
internal capsule, or even the corona radiotic giving you contralateral hemiplegia, okay? This is a
pure motor syndrome. Thalamus, we talked about this a little bit already, but thalamus will give you
a pure sensory syndrome with contralateral numbness, okay? Central pain is often thalamic pain,
and that is neuropathic pain and stroke patients that becomes very difficult to treat. You'll use
things like anticonvulsins, desensitization therapy, if you will, and other things, but it can be
really, really hard. TCA is just really hard to actually treat thalamic pain. Movement disorders
can happen with lecuna strokes as well, so basal ganglia is what I think about, small blood vessels
feeding the basal ganglia. If you have a lesion in the contralateral hemipleusmus, then you'll get,
that's, I'm sorry, if you have a lesion in the contralateral sub thalamic nucleus, you'll get
hemipleusmus, okay, is what you'll get. So violent flinging motions of the contralateral,
usually it's the contralateral upper limb. Violent flinging motions is hemipleusmus,
and that's the sub thalamic nucleus. By the way, we often will use deep brain stimulators
to stimulate the sub thalamic nucleus in Parkinson's disease patients, for some reason that works
and helps with their tremors, basically, reducing their tremors. If you see someone with contralateral
hemicuria, that's a contralateral caudate nucleus lesion, okay, caudate nucleus being implied
in Huntington disease, okay, caudate atrophy. Contralateral hemicuria being more kind of dancing
movements, and they will get a kind of writhing movements as well with that, okay, with that
hemicuria. But we'll talk more about that stuff later on. Dysarthria clumsy hand syndrome is,
this is a contralateral pontine lesion. Sometimes you'll get asked, basically, where is the lesion
in Dysarthria clumsy hand syndrome, and it's simply just a contralateral pontine lesion is what
that is. All right, brain stem stroke syndromes. We're circling back and trying to give you a refresher
now on what you learned in that brain stem anatomy, but now we're actually going to apply it to
brain stem strokes, okay. I didn't want to do it all at once. I wanted to give you time to
process it, and let's come back to it now and hit it again. So, note that in all of these brainstem
syndromes, okay, there is actually no mention of aphasia or cognitive deficits. That's very, very
important. You should have that hammered into that brain stem strokes cognitively. They're fine.
Nothing, everything is sub-cortical in these patients, okay. So they don't have aphasia,
because that's a cortex lesion, right, broca, verinocotype stuff, and they don't have cognitive
deficits, because this is all brain stem. This isn't where their intelligence and their
perception and all that stuff is. It's just brain stem stuff, okay, and you know about that brainstem
stuff now, because we drew it out. They're all below the brain, so there's none of that stuff.
There's no personality stuff here, unless that was pre-morbid. Wallenberg syndrome, okay. This
is lateral medullary syndrome. Remember, you have midbrain, ponds, medula. So this is medula,
and it's lateral medula, right? So what we have here, I kind of made up a mnemonic to help you
guys remember this lateral medullary syndrome. This is the pica artery. Remember the pica and the
vertebral artery are what we talked about. That caused lateral medullary syndrome. So think about
Dr. Horner Wallenberg, a very esteemed neurologist. He's at the VA and he says don't pick a horse
that can't eat. So don't pick a horse that can't eat is a mnemonic that's popularly thrown
around for Wallenberg syndrome. I'm just kind of branching off that and saying Dr. Horner Wallenberg
at the VA says don't pick a horse that can't eat, okay, if you're thinking about a horse race.
Horner Wallenberg means you get an epsilon lateral Horner syndrome in Wallenberg syndrome.
Vertebral artery is implicated as is the pica. The patient is a horse, okay, because they have
medullary cranial nerve lesions, okay. You have cranial nerve 9, 10, you have cranial nerve 12.
Mostly thinking about cranial nerve 10 with this, but nucleus ambiguous is kind of what you're
getting at with this. So the patient has a horse voice and they can't eat again with those
lower medullary cranial nerves getting implicated there. So it's a vertebral artery, pica stroke,
you have a horse voice, thinking about 9, 10. You have dysphasia, cranial nerve 10, they can't eat.
So cranial nerve 10 there. We talked about epsilon lateral Horner syndrome, which is again
tossus meiosis and hydrosus. And the pica, that's a cerebellar artery, right? It's in the name,
pica, okay. So the patient may fall towards the side of the lesion. If you think about all these
things, okay, then that's a patient with Wallenberg syndrome, very, very commonly asked. So this is
a really high yield brain stem syndrome for you to know. Remember in this, nowhere here, did I say
that there's contralateral hemiparesis or hemiplegia, okay. So these patients in lateral medullary
syndrome, look, this is lateral. So is there motor pathway over here? No, motor pathway is an M
structure, which is midline, okay. So the cortical spinal tract is fine. So they don't have contralateral
hemiplegia, okay. They're perfectly strong on the other side. So remember, this is the absence
of contralateral hemiplegia. You do get hemiplegia a lot with brain stem strokes, so they love to
get you with this one when they ask you about it. Webber syndrome, this is a pretty easy one to
remember, I think. I remember basically two things with this. And it's that patients, they're,
you know, think about somebody being parol, like stepping into a bunch of spider webs and saying,
oh, I'm paralyzed by three webs. And so that's Webber syndrome. And they're paralyzed in its
cranial nerve three, okay. Contralateral hemiparesis or that paralysis we talked about. Contralateral
hemiparesis and Ipsilateral cranial nerve three palsy, okay. Cranial nerve giving you Ipsilateral
deficits and motor pathway giving you a contralateral deficit there, okay. So this is a medial midbrain
lesion is what it is if you put this together. Midbrain pons medula. If we're medial in the midbrain
here, that medial cortical spinal tract is here as is cranial nerve three, right. One through four
are here, five through eight are here, and cranial nerve nine through twelve are here in the medula.
Medula pons and midbrain. So this is a medial midbrain lesion giving you Webber syndrome, okay.
That should make sense. And we're talking about the midbrain here. So what vessels are up here,
probably not the vertebral artery, probably not pica, because those are down here, probably not
basil or artery. It's probably the PCA, because that's up here, right. The posterior cerebral artery.
So think about that in terms of vascular. Medial medular syndrome is also really easy to remember.
I want you to basically think about a couple things with this. We are midbrain pons medula again.
If we're medial medular syndrome, that's the name of it. What we're going to have here is cranial
nerve twelve, right, because of our rules of four. Cranial nerve twelve is here as is the motor pathway,
okay. So you're going to get a contralateral hemiparesis, because that motor pathway is here,
you're going to get Ipsilateral cranial nerve twelve deficits, okay. And what that's going to
cause is you lick your wounds basically. When the patient sticks their tongue out, the tongue deviates
towards the side of a lesion. So you lick your wounds with cranial nerve twelve lesion. Okay,
so if the patient is licking their wounds, Ipsilateral tongue deviation, they have contralateral
hemiparesis. You pretty much have it right there. They'll also have contralateral sensory deficits,
numbness and tingling touch pathway stuff, because again, medial limb niscus is a midline structure,
so they will have that deficit too. You know if they have all this stuff, especially with that
tongue deviation towards the side of a lesion, you know it's medial medialary syndrome in that case.
So you know exactly how to localize that. We talked about locked-ins syndrome already. It's
basilar artery occlusion. If you go back with our, I guess none of these actually drew the artery
in, but the basilar artery is right here over the ponds, okay. If that is occluded, you get a locked-ins
syndrome, okay. Tetraplegia with spared ability to move the eyes vertically and blink, okay.
The reticular activating system is spared. That actually starts off in the midbrain,
and so that's right here. Reticular activating system starts here and fans out,
okay, as it enters the cortex to give you consciousness, basically. So if your lesion is here,
clearly this is okay, the rest, the reticular activating system, thus your consciousness is
totally fine. You're your same self, only your tetraperetic or tetraplegic, and that's really a
torturous thing for these patients. They're fully conscious. Okay, stroke rehab.
The way we get patients better after stroke is by getting them into rehab as soon as possible,
okay. Patients have better outcomes with that, but while they're in rehab, we do three major
things, okay. We take advantage of time. Really after their stroke, they will get most of the function
that they're going to get back after their stroke takes place within the first three to six months
following their stroke, okay. So we take advantage of that time, and we also use what they
still have, what function they haven't lost, and we also use what they get back, you know, as they
recover from their stroke, they will be able to contribute more to their therapies and get more back.
The other thing we do is we do cross our fingers. You know, stroke rehab is not a perfect
science at this point. We are still uncovering ways that the brain heals itself and ways that we
can help that brain heal. And so a lot of it's still in this century as finger crossing. I hope
that changes at some point in the near future. But we do all we can right now and it involves a
really intensive rehab. That's really the best thing for these patients, okay, in patient rehab.
And so we're going to talk about some different theoretical ways of approaching these patients
to rehab them. It seems obvious like you might think, yeah, just put them in rehab and have them
just supervising that they try to do more intense functional tasks, but there's really more to it
than that. And what we're all trying to do here is drive the neurologic recovery and neuroplasticity
of their brain, the ability of their brain to actually kind of relearn how to do things and kind of
shape itself around after their injury. The first strategy we'll talk about is the bobat technique.
Before we talk about that, it's also called neurodevelopmental technique. Before we talk about that,
the way a patient recovers from a stroke, they tend to follow there's some literature that was done
on this early on in the 20th century about how patients basically documented how patients tend to
recover following a stroke and it documented exactly that pattern that takes place. So if you're
looking at hemiparesis, for example, there's several stages that you'll go through one to seven
and one being totally flaccid, you can't do anything and seven being normal. And these are patients
who totally recovered from their stroke, you know, once you get to stage seven. A lot of patients
will have their stroke and they'll stop at stage three, for example. They won't just make it all
the way through to seven every time. That would be fantastic if we could do that. What I want to
highlight here is that, you know, the name of this scale is not really important. What's important
is that you understand they go from totally flaccid to normal with abs and spasticity if a patient
totally recovers. Now, most people actually, most physiatrists even do not really even know about
this scale. If they do know about it, there's really one thing that they know about. And so what
what I'm trying to say is if people will ask you questions about this and sometimes they will
on board exams, you'll get a question about this. There's really one thing to know about it because
because most physiatrists don't really know a whole lot about this scale, they really know like one
thing about it. And so when they ask you a question about it, they're going to ask you about that
one thing they know about it, which is that in stage three, that's when you have peak spasticity
of hemiprovesis recovery from a stroke. Stage three is when spasticity is at its absolute peak.
And, you know, it's also when you start to get some control over your voluntary flexor
synergy patterns and extensive synergy patterns, but peak spasticity is at stage three. And that's
often what you get asked about about the recovery stages of hemiprovesis that stage three is peak
spasticity. I want you guys to note that as you get more control through this scale here, you
get decreased spasticity the more you're able to control your muscles. They tend to go hand in hand.
When you get a stroke and your hemiprovesis, you tend to get an upper extremity flexor
synergy pattern, get elbow flexion, wrist flexion, finger flexion, pronation, etc., and a lower
extremity extensor synergy pattern, which is the opposite of that. All right. So moving on,
we talk about the neurodevelopmental technique or bobath approach to rehabbing these patients.
The biggest thing about this is you can read all this stuff, but we want to inhibit abnormal tone,
we want to inhibit primitive reflexes, such as the bobbinsky reflex and pommel mental reflex.
We want to inhibit these things. And so we want to inhibit spasticity, which means these things
are back. So neurodevelopmental technique means getting rid of these, not encouraging them.
There are other techniques you can use like the brunstream technique, in which case you're
actually going to encourage using what the patient's got, which is their abnormal tone. So let's use
it. But bobath technique says, no, we want to inhibit that because that stuff's not normal
in a normal patient who hasn't had a stroke. We don't want to reinforce those primitive pathways
or spasticity, or else the patient may stay that way. It might be bad. We want to encourage the
brain to actually heal and be a normal human brain and have normal movement patterns. We don't want
to reinforce these primitive spastic pathways, okay? So we want to inhibit spastic tone with therapy
and orthoses in this pathway here or in this approach. The brunstream technique, what is this?
So I apologize in advance if anybody has named brunstream out there. We're going to use your name
as an example of a villain, okay? We're going to think of bobath and the neurodevelopmental
technique as the good technique. We want to avoid the bad tone, the bad primitive reflexes,
and in brunstream. In the brunstream technique, we're embracing it. We're embracing the evil.
We're embracing spasticity, okay? With the idea of being, hey, that's all the patient has is
that abnormal spasticity and tone. So let's use it to advantage. Let's use it so that patient uses
their quadriceps spasticity to perform transfers and stuff like that. We're using that spasticity to
perform functional tasks, okay? There's no guarantee anything else is going to come back. So let's use
what we've got. You can use these spastic synergy patterns for ADL's mobility, muscle conditioning,
preventing breakdown and stuff like that. The theory being you originally developed this way
as an infant. So it's really not that abnormal to redo it while you're hoping that more normal
function comes back. The rude technique, I think of rude, like, rude when I think of the rude
technique, okay? That's not nice, basically. And because what we're doing, what the therapist is
doing is using cataneous stimuli like all of these down here to basically promote normal enhancement
of motor control and activity, okay? And reduce spasticity in these patients. So when they're doing
that, they're pushing, they're tapping, they're vibrating on that patient, stroking, applying heat
and ice, et cetera. They're doing all these things to the patient's skin and I think of the patient
saying, well, that's rude, okay? And that's how I know this is the rude technique or rude technique,
okay? That's the rude technique using cataneous sensory stimuli to help promote recovery.
The PNF or proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation sounds complicated like you have to learn a
bunch of stuff. It's basically diagonal movements. That's all you need to know about PNF, okay?
You use diagonal movement patterns in the PNF approach and it's proprioceptive because if you,
you know, it takes proprioception when you close your eyes and you perform a diagonal movement
with your eyes closed, it takes proprioception to be able to actually do that to know where your
arm is in space. Thus, that's the PNF theory is that proprioceptive approach of using diagonal
movements, okay? You know, we don't normally move like robots, you know, flexing and then rotating
and doing things all at once. We use diagonal movements, okay? That's a normal thing to do. And so
that's this theory says that therapies should emphasize diagonal movements, okay? Really in reality,
you probably use, you know, the Bobeth approach is probably the most popular, but we really end up
using a good mix of these approaches, although I'm not a therapist myself. Constraint induced
movement therapy or CIMT, that's basically where you have one good arm and you have the
hemiparetic arm, okay? So you want them to get to use that hemiparetic arm, okay? And so the way
you do that is by restraining the good arm, so to speak, and forcing that weak arm to do things
to work, okay? If the patient has hemiparetic duct and you're trying to get them to use their
left arm and they have a right-sided MCA stroke and they have hemiparetic duct on the left side
and you want them to get them to use their left arm, it's not going to work because they're
neglecting that left side, okay? So constratum CIMT will not work in patients with hemiparetic duct
and a weak limb, okay? In order to do CIMT, it's high yield to know that the patient must have
some degree of active wrist extension to actually be able to attempt that, okay? It's just a caveat
with this. It's probably good enough for you to know that, to remember that the patient should
have wrist extension. I'm not sure you need to know about the 10 degrees of active wrist extension,
but it helps you to know that, okay? You need that to actually participate in CIMT.
All right, medical complications of stroke. So, yeah, patients don't just have the stroke with
weakness, they actually have other things, okay? Specificity like we talked about. They get a lot
of shoulder pathology, that shoulder is so weak it just pops out of the joint. They get CRPS,
complex regional pain syndrome, okay? They get dysphagia, they get swallowing problems,
neurogenic bowel and bladder, they get all this, okay? We're going to talk about each of these
individually to understand what they are and how you actually manage them when you're on the
inpatient rehab floor. Disphagia is the first one. Now, normal swallowing, it takes place in four phases.
Sometimes people will say three phases and they'll just say oral, fair and geol and esophageal,
but we're going to talk about oral preparatory as well, okay? Now, you will get asked questions on this,
so normal swallowing is four phases, oral preparatory. This is voluntary, right? You're just
swishing stuff around in your mouth. Oral phase is also voluntary, right? You're basically,
again, just choosing to swallow at that point, so that's a voluntary phase. Fair and geol phase is
involuntary. You can't command what your fairings is doing and the esophageal you certainly are at
the mercy of whatever your esophagus is doing. You can't command that yourself. You just choose to
start the swallow. That's why these two, the oral phases are voluntary. In the preparatory phase,
you do what? You prepare the bolus for actual swallowing by the fairings, okay? The soft palate will
move downward to seal the oral cavity in this case, okay? In the oral phase, what happens is that,
again, this is voluntary, but the tongue and the soft palate will rise at this phase. The tongue
and the soft palate will rise as the tongue compresses the bolus and propels it backwards into the esophagus,
okay? The tongue in doing this and sending it to the esophagus, it has to move posteriorly to do
that to deliver the bolus to the esophagus. So, you get tongue and soft palate rising and a tongue
moving posteriorly in the oral phase. In the fair and geol phase, this is involuntary. You cannot
command this. You can only initiate it. The bolus is transferred from the oral cavity to the esophagus
and this is when aspiration happens, okay? In the fair and geol phase, this is probably the most
high yield thing for you to know about swallowing is that aspiration or food going down into the trachea
is, it occurs during the fair and geol phase. The esophageol phase is involuntary, okay?
All right. So, in stroke patients, this motor program that we just talked about, right? The
four phases of swallowing there that is largely autonomic is often impaired, leading to an unsafe
swallow in patients with a stroke, which means what happens when you have an unsafe swallow,
you might send food down the wrong pipe, right? It might go into the trachea, you may aspirate,
have a pneumonia and become really, really sick. And so, with this impaired motor program,
I mean, you want to know about that and you want to have your speech therapist evaluate the patient
and to see what kind of diet they can tolerate. Often, an early stroke patient cannot tolerate
an oral diet because they're way, they just can't coordinate what needs to be coordinated in order
to properly swallow liquids or solids of varying thicknesses and thinnestes and textures. And so,
commonly, this motor program that we just talked about is a high yield impaired in the
fair and geol phase of swallowing. Again, you know, an autonomic phase there. And so, if this is
impaired, and a patient cannot swallow safely, then we make them NPO, nothing by mouth, right?
Or are given a modified diet as determined by a speech language pathologist, a speech therapist.
So, these modified diets have different consistencies and consistency to them and we'll talk about
that in the following slides. The concepts here are that thin liquids, you know, a regular,
thin diet is a quote-unquote normal diet, right? Thin liquids like water. They're actually tricky
to manipulate. And so, you know, theoretically, it's easiest to send thin liquids into the trachea
and aspirate, you know, and have a pneumonia. And so, thin liquids are the most difficult
type of liquid to manipulate for patients with dysphagia as the liquid moves quite fast and is
difficult to control. Thus, often thicker liquids, which are not super-palatable by pretty much
anybody, if you've ever tried them, thicker liquids are often ordered in order to prevent aspiration.
Now, some speech therapists will tell you, maybe thicker, thickened liquids might do more harm
than good in the general population, but that's, we're not going to debate about that today. We're
just going to tell you that commonly thickened liquids will be ordered as part of a modified diet
in the name of promoting patient safety and safe swallowing. So, in contrast, the thicker the
liquid, the more time your oropharyngeal muscles have to coordinate properly and move the bolus
along and allow for a safe swallow. So, we'll start with liquids and then we'll move on to solids.
Luckily, they are actually categorized by speech pathologists on the same continuum of thickness.
And so, we'll talk about that now. These kind of things can change over time, but there has been
this international dysphagia diet standardization initiative, which is appropriately on topic
a mouthful to say. But first, you know, again, we'll talk about liquids and then solids.
Liquids can be thickened to prevent easier, safer swallowing. We've talked about that.
That's what we're trying to do here. There have been many different ways, you know,
throughout history to describe the thickness of liquids over time. Previously, people have talked
about honey thick versus nectar thick versus pudding thick liquids. I always had a really hard time
trying to decipher what that actually means and which one's thicker than the others and which
one is in the middle and all that. And so, the international, you know, the IDDSI rolls off the
tongue, right, was created to standardize the terminology used by healthcare professionals
in terms of modified diets and how thick a liquid is, right? And so, it actually goes from zero to
seven. It's really actually not that hard to conceptualize here. So, levels zero is the thinnest
liquid you can get. And if you go all the way up to level seven, that's actually just solid food,
regular diet, solid food. So, zero to seven is just a continuum of how thick something is.
If it's zero, it's like there's nothing there. And it's so thin that it's like water, right?
So, level zero type of liquid is a thin liquid. And then as you go up from there, I'm not going to
read them all to you. But as you go up from there, you get into increasing gradations of thickness,
right? So, level four liquid is like an extremely thick liquid. It's basically like a pureed food.
As we move on to solids, you see solids start at seven and go down all the way to more liquid
levels, you know, down to four and three. Level four, as we just mentioned, a level four liquid
is basically just a puree, right? Which is what we have here on level four solids. And so,
this continuum here, you can look at a couple times and appreciate. It goes from zero to seven,
zero is really thin. Seven is, you know, regular diet. And this is actually not a typo here,
the two sevens. And so, that's basically the continuum that the IDDSI, I believe I said that
correctly, has come up with to standardize the language that's used here. Again, solid food,
just because it's on the page here, solid food does, again, have other different levels of
yeast to it that can be modified, with basically like a puree liquid hybrid type thing being the
easiest solid consistency to manipulate. And so, that's liquids and solids. Modified diets,
most patients don't like them. Most patients like, in fact, pretty much all patients like a regular
diet with thin liquids. It's a quote unquote normal diet. And so, the idea is you want to progress
patients along this continuum in terms of solid foods. You want to get them from this level three
area wherever they are along here to a level seven, back to a level seven regular diet. And with
liquids, you know, you maybe want to start thick and just progress them along to thin liquids.
They may already be there upon a speech therapist's bedside swallow exam. But you want to
at least get them there by the end. That's your goal is level zero, thin, and then level seven
solids is where you want to get the patient to. So again, the patients will progress, you know,
in whatever direction along this continuum from an easier diet to a potentially regular diet
with thin liquids. That's your goal. How do you first assess where a patient is with this? That's
done by a speech language pathologist or a speech therapist. And they do this with a quick bedside
swallow study. So the speech therapist will actually try all the patient on different thicknesses
of liquids and solids and see how they do with it basically. They're going to watch the way they
coordinate their muscles and attempt to swallow the food bolus or the liquid bolus and see what
happens. I mean, does the patient exhibit signs or symptoms of aspiration, you know, sending
food material down the wrong pipe into the trachea, right? Doesn't do any of those symptoms or
signs come about, right? So what that might look like is if a patient is aspirating, they might
start to cough while they're eating, okay? And then you know, okay, yeah, something went in the wrong
direction there. Maybe they have a wet kind of gargly sounding voice or maybe just an altered
vocal quality in general, which should not happen if food is properly entering the esophagus,
which is not continuous with the lungs. And so this should not, you know, properly sending the
food down the esophagus should not produce any of these symptoms here. But if they do happen,
then that those are, you know, indications that, okay, maybe the patient is not tolerating
this current level of diet that we just trialed. And maybe we need to trial something, you know,
thicker for them or easier for them to swallow. Sometimes silent aspiration does occur,
and the patient, you know, will not necessarily give you indicators that they're actually
aspirating, but it does happen, okay? So the patient not really exhibiting any signs or symptoms
of aspiration, yet they are nonetheless aspirating. That's called silent aspiration. You can actually
detect this on what's called the gold standard of swallow studies, and you have to know this.
It's an MBS or a modified barium swallow. That's a patient taking a contrast dye bollus,
contrast dye mixed in with some food material that they swallow. And it's actually, you shoot
x-ray pictures, you shoot an x-ray image of the patient, sagitally, and you observe this
dye attempting to be swallowed. And you see where it travels, and you see exactly where the
different partitions of food bollus will end up, and you see if anything is entering the trachea,
where it should not, or if it's all entering the esophagus, and how smooth that process is,
and what the coordination looks like. It's actually a very informative study, and MBS, you know,
is what you want when you're trying to have a really good swallow study, and actually determine
what's going on with the patient, or best determine what's going on with the patient's swallow.
So often on inpatient rehab, you'll be sending your patient for an MBS study, and you'll be
crossing your fingers, like maybe today's the day we can get them a regular diet with thin liquids,
right? So it's often kind of an exciting time whenever you send somebody for MBS, because you
might get to upgrade their diet later that day. And that's always a fun discussion to have.
There is a thing called a These, and that's a phyboroptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing.
That's literally just a direct video visualization of somebody swallowing, but it is limited in terms
of its usefulness, because the scope is there, and that's abnormal, right? That video scope is
just right there in the mouth and pharynx and everything, and so it kind of inhibits a normal swallow
in that regard, but it is another diagnostic method you can use to evaluate direct visualization
of swallowing action. Okay, so we already talked about this a little bit. If they're NPO,
we still have to feed the patient, right? So we just use non-oral means of feeding. This could be
an NG tube, or a duo tube, it's sometimes called. It can also be a gastric tube, okay? And that's
really if you anticipate prolonged, if the patient hasn't been able to eat anything for at least two
weeks, and you don't really think they're going to get that function back, you think about a G tube
in that case, because NG tubes, or duo tubes, that's really irritating to the nasal mucosa,
and so patients hate these, and so you want to get them out as quickly as possible,
progressing with their swallow function, or progressing to a G tube, okay? So they don't have to
deal with that. This is just a tube from the abdominal skin directly into the stomach, okay? And so
that's a safer way of feeding patients that are totally NPO. While we're working on swallowing
strategies, we do some certain things, okay? And popularly they include a chin tuck, and these are
strategies patients can do to have an improved swallow while they have dysphagia, okay? A chin
tuck actually tucks the patient's chin down to their chest, like you're really flexing forward
this cervical spine, and this actually pushes the larynx away from the pharynx, and constricts the
posterior pharynx to actually squeeze the bolus through and into the esophagus. It basically
limits your risk of aspiration, because you force things into the right pipe. That's all you're
doing with a chin tuck. With the head rotation, that's also a really popular testable
compensatory strategy. You'll get asked about these two, and we talked about chin tuck, and head
rotation is you just turn the head, you look basically, you rotate the neck towards the parietic side,
okay? Towards the weak side, because that side of the esophagus is weak, and it's not constricting
properly. So we turn towards it to crush it off, and only the healthy side of the esophagus will
do its peristalsis and actually work. So you close off the parietic side and facilitate normal
swallowing that way, and that can be useful for patients to limit dysphagia symptoms and aspiration
risk. Disphagia actually has a favorable prognosis overall in stroke patients, in terms of having
some diet be reintroduced into the patient's life. You honestly do expect some swallowing
function to come back in your stroke patients. Okay, neurogenic bladder. Neurogenic bladder
leads to incontinence, and this is very common after stroke, okay? Neurogenic bladder, you have no
control over your bladder. It's in stroke patients, it's an upper motor neuron lesion, spastic bladder
type thing, okay? And so, you know, other things contributing here to incontinence just for completeness
they had a stroke, so they can't move, okay? They have impaired cognition, they can't even
communicate their needs that they have to go to the bathroom. So those are other things contributing
to incontinence, but these patients will have an upper motor neuron lesion because of their brain
lesion, thus giving them a spastic bladder, okay? An upper motor neuron bladder, okay? Which means
the bladder barely fills up with a little bit of urine volume, and the detrusor is hyper-reflexic.
At that point, it's spastic, right? So it spastically contracts to empty the bladder, causing
incontinence, okay? Which is just a little bit of urine filling up that bladder, so it's a small
hyperactive bladder is what you get. The best treatment for this is a timed voiding program,
going to the bathroom at regular intervals throughout the day, at the same exact intervals
each day. It's a timed voiding program, you'll actually get a lot of questions on that,
and the correct treatment is a timed voiding program in terms of initial treatment, okay?
With fluid intake regulation there, you don't want them pounding eight liters a day because then
they're going to have a ton of incontinence throughout the day. Whenever somebody has a bladder
incontinence, especially if it's new, think about UTI as an etiology for that, especially in your
spinal cord injury patients, but that's for another chapter. Sometimes we do use anticholinergic
medications in these patients, like oxybutin and totalteridine, because we'll talk about this a lot
in the pharmacology and spinal cord injury chapters, but the bladder has these muscarinic
colonurgic, the detrusor, the bladder wall basically, has muscarinic or colonurgic same thing,
receptors. Thus, if we block those receptors, we actually will have the detrusor not contract,
because it contracts in response to colonurgic stimulation via the parasympathetic pelvic nerves.
So, if we block that parasympathetic pathway with anti-colinergics here, then we actually calm
the bladder down and promote storage. It can have cognitive side effects, and that's why we don't
like to use these instruct patients, because they already have enough cognitive badness going on
basically. Sometimes we do use clean intermittent catheterization instruct patients, but we'll talk
about that more in the spinal cord injury section. Neurogenic bowel. This is common after stroke as
well. Usually it resolves within the first two weeks, and we treat this the same way with a timed
bowel program, maintaining a regular diet and bowel medication schedule, okay? Polyethylene glycol,
and sena and suppositories and fiber are very helpful, and we also want to improve the patient's
mobility to get to the toilet. So, DVTs, deep vein thrombosis, these are very common after strokes,
okay? principally because these patients have impaired mobility and muscle contraction,
meaning they have a lot of venous stasis, which again is a risk factor for developing DVT.
Remember your vurchase triad, stasis endothelial injury, and hypercoagulability. These are the
three main factors that contribute to producing DVTs in patients. To diagnose these, we typically do
Doppler ultrasound, and sometimes you do that as a, you know, as soon as a patient is admitted to
impatient rehab, you do screening Dopplers on these patients to look for DVTs, and some people
take issue with that, so it really depends on what your preference is if you want to do screening
Doppler exams to screen for DVTs. Some people argue it is cost effective to do that versus not
doing it. D-dimer test is sensitive, but not specific for DVT, and if you're, you know,
thinking about DVTs as a responsible physiatrist, you want to think about prophylaxis for them,
not just treatment, but prophylaxis. The most effective prophylaxis for DVTs is actually
anti-coagulation, okay? Chemical anti-coagulation. So, you use subcutaneous heparin,
or SQH, or low molecular weight heparin, and enoxyparin. Enoxyparin or low molecular weight
heparin, that's really the best thing, and the chemical anti-coagulation with enoxyparin.
That's the best thing for preventing DVTs. You can also use segmental sequential compression
devices and compression stockings, but chemo-prophylaxis is the best thing. You treat a DVT if you have one.
Again, this is not internal medicine, it's PM&R, but typically you'll do like a heparin drip,
or you'll increase to therapeutic low-ven, enoxyparin dosage in these patients. You can use an
IVC filter that can be placed in the patients in fear of inocava to catch any clots that are thrown
from the legs towards the lungs. You can use those if a patient is at too great of a risk to bleed
with the chemo-prophylaxis. Sometimes in really high cervical spinal cord injury patients,
you have low respiratory reserve. We'll put these IVC filters in prophylaxically,
because they have such low respiratory reserve, and they really can't even breathe on their own.
They're on a ventilator that any sort of PE in their lungs is just going to devastate them,
that the risks are worth the benefits here. But yeah, you can put IVC filters in if patients
are bleeding risk. CRPS, complex regional pain syndrome. We talk about this a lot in the pain,
medicine, or pain rehab chapter, but sometimes you call it reflex sympathetic dystrophy or shoulder
hand syndrome. They all mean the same thing, which is CRPS. In this case, it's really CRPS type 1,
and what this is, it's sympathetically mediated pain due to some kind of abnormal sympathetic
processing that goes on after a stroke or after a trauma. It results in an area of the body having
increased neuropathic pain, hypersensitivity, allodinia. Allodinia being other pain basically,
or just a non-painful stimulus that's normally non-painful, causing you pain. Like light touch
on the skin, causing a lot of pain. That's allodinia. All of this is in conjunction with detectable
skin and vasomotor changes over the affected area on the body. CRPS type 1, all this stuff happens
without a known peripheral nerve injury. In CRPS type 2, or cause-algia, is also what that's called.
All this happens within a known peripheral nerve distribution with a documented peripheral
nerve injury. CRPS has three stages. Acute, dystrophic, and atrophic. We will discuss this in detail
in another section. Post-stroke shoulder pain. A lot of stroke patients do get shoulder pain.
And honestly, it's not always clear why they have shoulder pain. We like to think we know why
they have it all the time, but sometimes they just have it. And it's just part of their stroke.
It's really common. It can be CRPS. It can be post-thalamic stroke pain syndrome. That's really
hard to treat like we talked about. Or it can actually just be, hey, you know, they're a patient
with a shoulder. They're allowed to get musculoskeletal or MSK shoulder pathology. So maybe it's just
that. And what that would include is rotator cuff tears, impingement, subachromal bursitis,
adhesive capsillitis, or frozen shoulder. That happens a lot after strokes. It can be just biceps
tendonitis, okay? We'll talk about each of these individually in the MSK shoulder section,
all right? Now, shoulder subluxation. This is a hot topic in terms of shoulder pain and stroke
patients. It's very common. Their rotator cuff is shot. So that shoulder, the ball and socket joint,
just the humeral head does not stay within the socket or the glenoid cavity. So it falls out
basically. And that's called a shoulder subluxation. It's just, it's really lax and it just hangs
down. And there's actually a palpable gap. And we talk about that here. There's a palpable gap
or sulcus when you're touching the humeral head and the acromion. There's a big gap between them.
And there shouldn't be. You shouldn't be able to feel that huge divot that's there. But that's
there because the humeral head is inferiorly displaced. And so there's a big gap there now.
We're not entirely sure if shoulder subluxation actually causes pain, but it makes us feel better
to put a patient in a sublux cuff to, you know, basically maintain the humeral head in the socket.
Adhesive capsulitis is a frozen shoulder. Basically, the reason for this is that they're not
using their shoulder at all because it's hemiparetic. So all the, the whole shoulder capsul
just contracts downward and you never move your shoulder around to actually expand it. And so it
just contracts downward and it stays really, really tight. And that's what a frozen shoulder is.
And it, because it's really, really tight, now you, you can't move it anywhere without
causing any extreme pain or a range of motion limitation, especially in abduction and external
rotation. That's really what goes in a frozen shoulder. And again, I talk about this in the MSK
shoulder section. Now, spasticity. There is an SCI full spasticity section where we talk about this,
but it happens after a stroke, okay? You get this type of pattern from complexity, from complete
flexibility to normal. Remember that stage three is peak spasticity stage, okay? And as you get more
control over your flexor and extensor synergy patterns, you get decreased spasticity, okay?
This pathway often gets halted at step three, which is really bad, just peak spasticity stage.
And the patient has to live with that, essentially. Remember what spasticity actually is?
It's not rigidity. That's just in, and basically an omnipresent resistance to passive movement.
That's not velocity dependent. Spasticity, on the other hand, you can gently arrange that arm
all the way around, but as soon as you apply a high velocity to that elbow extension, for example,
it stops you right there, and that spastic elbow flexor tone kicks in. That's velocity dependent
resistance to passive movement of a joint, okay? That's what spasticity is. There's definitely
questions in your future on that, on what spasticity is. It's velocity dependent resistance to
passive stretch of a muscle, okay? Commonly retreats spasticity with oral, interethical pumps,
or injection-based medications, okay? Like botulinum toxin. Again, we talk about that in SCI
and pharmacology sections for how to treat that. Okay, so stroke patients often don't return to work.
That shouldn't be a big shocker to you. We do this thing called the Barthol index, and it's
basically a tool ranging from zero to 100, where 100 is really good, and you're just the physician,
and you're putting up their score on how functional a patient is. Looking at different tasks of
things they can do, things they can't do, what types of ADLs, toilet and dressing, things like that.
What are they able to do, and what are they not able to do on their own, and how much function do
they require? How much help do they require with that? How independent are they with that? Once
you tally up all those scores, it's the whole sheet that you'll fill out. Once you tally it up,
you want to get as close to 100 as you can. That means the patient is independent, okay?
And you don't actually have to observe the patient doing all this stuff. You just have to like
ask the patient's family member, ask the therapist, just gather all the data the best way that you can
for determining what a patient's score is on the Barthol index. Sometimes you might get asked a question
on that. Risk factors for not returning to work, other things, what the actual risk factors are,
are a prolonged inpatient rehabs day, having aphasia, right? If you have a language deficit,
and having a low score on this index, okay? Like if you have a five on this scale, you're probably
not returning to work, whatever your work was at that point. All right, so movement disorders.
Movement disorders, I include in this chapter because it's really the best place to put them as they
are, often intracranial disorders, just like strokes are, and the structures involved in movement
disorders are often damaged in stroke patients as well. So it kind of fits together nicely.
So we're going to talk about them here. It's about ten slides here. Movement disorders are named
so because they result in abnormal involuntary movement patterns of a patient's head or limbs,
okay? These are all abnormal movement patterns, so they're movement disorders. Usually in movement
disorders, the basal ganglia or the cerebellum is involved in some way, okay? You can't coordinate
stuff properly, and you can't execute motor programs properly in either of these cases.
The basal ganglia, what that is, is it's basically the center that takes all your motor programs that
originate in the pre-motor and motor cortex or cortices, and it takes those and integrates them
and it inhibits inappropriate movements and allows appropriate movements. And so these basal ganglia,
it's a complicated network of nuclei actually in the brain that coordinates and executes movement
programs that originate in those cortices. The cerebellum, as you know, controls
it's a lateral balance and coordination of movements, all right? So with movement disorders,
we have a lot of terms that we talk about here. It's actually not too many. It's basically just this
slide. Ataxia is one and that's impaired coordination, all right? Usually when you think about ataxia,
you do think about cerebellar lesions with that, but there's other types of ataxia.
Cerebellar ataxia is due to cerebellar lesions, okay? So they literally have impaired coordination
because they functionally from a brain standpoint cannot actually coordinate things, okay?
In these cerebellar ataxic patients, whether it's due to a stroke or a brain injury,
they will fall towards the side of the lesion, okay? So it's absolateral cerebellar deficits there
with cerebellar ataxia. Often a cerebellar ataxia, it can be hard to treat. We'll talk about
tremors actually with that later on. I'm getting ahead of myself here. Sensory ataxia. This is you
have impaired coordination due to your ability to not feel anything, okay? You can't feel anything
thus your ataxic. It's not a cerebellum problem. It's just the fact that you can't feel anything,
okay? You have impaired proprioception and sensation in your limbs. Thus, you can't feel anything
thus your ataxic. That's a sensory ataxia. There's another, a third ataxia here called vestibular ataxia.
And this is, you just have really poor balance. Thus, now you have poor coordination. You're
stumbling around and you can't have proper balance because you have a lesion of your vertebral
basilar system, okay? Giving you vestibular ataxia. With this, you often get nausea vomiting and
vertigo as well with vestibular ataxia. Another term that will come up is choreoathotosis.
Choreo, meaning dance and athotosis, meaning snake-like movements. So you get involuntary dancing,
snake-like, writhing movements of the limb. Choreoathotosis happens in Huntington disease
most often. Hemibolismeth is a contralateral subthelamic nucleus lesion. And this is what we already
talked about, which is violent flinging ballistic motions of the limb due to that subthelamic
nucleus lesion. Acathesia is just motor restlessness, okay? It's not really like
an abnormal contraction or anything like that. It's just pure restlessness, okay? Sometimes those
anti-psychotic drugs, those dopamine blockade drugs can cause acathesia. Ticks, I want to get at these.
These are voluntary actually. And I mentioned movement disorders for the most part being
involuntary, but ticks are voluntary muscle contractions or posturing due to kind of like inner
tension, basically an itch that needs to be relieved. It's kind of like an acathesia, if you will,
like a focal acathesia. They're voluntary though, okay? And it's more like just an itch that needs
to be scratched. Tremors, so tremors. The three main types of tremor I want to talk about. The
first one is essential tremor. And this is an involuntary tremor. These are all involuntary.
So they're not ticks, right? An essential tremor here. This is typically benign, and it's an
involuntary rhythmic motion while the patient is trying to maintain some kind of posture, some kind
of position of the limb. So it's basically a postural tremor, okay? Typically it's benign. It doesn't
necessarily mean something toxic is going on with them. Often the patient will volunteer that alcohol
improves their tremor, so they drink alcohol a lot. But propranol is really a treatment that you
will reach for if patient has essential tremor, okay? Which is a postural tremor type thing.
An intention tremor. This is a tremor that's not present at rest, and it's not really with
postural stuff. It's more if they're trying to point at something and have accuracy with that
pointing. That's an intention tremor. It's an involuntary rhythmic motion, right? A tremor
while trying to perform some kind of action with the limb, okay? They're not maintaining a static
position. They're performing an action with the limb. This often implies a cerebellular lesion
is taking place, and so the way you treat this intention tremor, it can be hard. It can be really
hard to treat this, but one thing you do is you start with, if it's in the hand, you start with
wrist weights, for example, or just weights on the limb that help to just stabilize it so that
that tremor can't move it around as much. If that fails, sometimes what actually can be really
effective is colonazepam in treating a cerebellular tremor or intention tremor. Finally, resting
tremor, we think about Parkinson's disease with resting tremors, okay? It means that while they're
just sitting there doing nothing, they're literally just resting, that tremor is taking place,
often at like three to five hertz in a pill-rolling appearance that you think about Parkinson's disease
with that, okay? Okay, and we'll get to Parkinson's disease. Dystonia, what is dystonia? That's
basically abnormal twisting postural muscle contractions, okay? Involuntary abnormal muscle contractions
that result in abnormal twisting and posturing. That's what dystonia is. Really abnormal posturing
is the key thing about dystonia that it causes. It's sustained abnormal muscle contractions that
cause that. This can be genetic. It can be related to too much anti-psychotics causing dystonia.
It can be from an intranial damage causing dystonia. Sometimes we really don't know what the
cause is actually. Some patients actually have Dopo-responsive dystonia. It's a small percentage
of the patients, but sometimes they do, and that just responds well to levodopa-carbidopa.
Cervical dystonia though, it's these abnormal postures, but you can have a lot of different abnormal
postures. So when we talk about this, there's certain postures we do talk about. Torta colis is the
most well-known one. We'll start with anaerocolus, and that's just head tilting. You just flex your
chin forward down and touch your chest with it. That's cervical flexion, and that's because of
bilateral sternoclidomastoid tightness, basically, or abnormal contraction. Bilateral SCM is what
you think about there. Retro-collis is the opposite. Your head is being extended, and you're looking
up towards the ceiling. This is because of cervical spinal abnormalities, and you think about
bilateral splinase capitis and spinal erectors with this. Torta colis, that's head turning. Remember
that you cannot forget that if you're looking to the left, it's the right SCM that's active.
If you're looking to the right, it's the left SCM that you're going to want to target. It's the
other SCM that's causing you to look in a direction. With Torta colis, you also think about
ifsylateral splinase capitis and levator scapula, contributing there as well.
Lateral colis, this is a lateral neck flexion. It's not a head turning. It's actually just a lateral
flexion, like touching your ear to your shoulder. In this, you think about ifsylateral splinase
capitis, scallions, and levator scapula taking place. Probably the most high-yield thing is knowing
that Torta colis is the head turning due to contralateral SCM. One thing, just off the top of my
head here, if you have SCM, like a dysplasia, or SCM fibrosis when you're born, that is very
commonly associated with hip dysplasia, actually. We'll probably talk about that in the
Peds chapter, but I want to hit it here in case we forget that if you have SCM fibrosis or congenital
Torta colis, due to SCM fibrosis, due to abnormal positioning in the womb, that is strongly
associated with congenital hip dysplasia. For cervical dystonia, especially botulinum neurotoxin
is very effective for treatment. It's a very effective therapy for treating this dystonia.
Myoclonus, what is that? That's a sudden involuntary muscle contraction. There's different ways
to talk about it. It's obviously very short here. Positive myoclonus refers to an involuntary
contraction of muscle. Negative myoclonus is an involuntary relaxation. So you grip somebody
with your hand and you just can't release. Well, that's actually positive myoclonus there.
Negative myoclonus, again, being you cannot relax there. That's an example of what could happen
with that. You treat this with anachonvulsins, or of course, neurotoxin, botulinum toxin injection.
Restless leg syndrome. That's another movement disorder. This is an irresistible urge to move
your legs. And it's not exactly painful. It's just this intense tension and urge to move your legs.
It's very uncomfortable. It's not exactly painful. It's just highly uncomfortable.
When you have a patient describing this to you, it's iron deficiency anemia until proven otherwise.
So you have to check iron labs on them. And that can improve with iron therapy, but often we
actually don't know why the patient has this. They just do. You can treat it with levodopa
carbidopa, ropinolol, ropinolol, and primaphexol. Note the common theme among those is that those
are pro dopaminergic agents to treat restless legs syndrome. Huntington disease.
So this is autosomal dominant disorder. It has anticipation. So if your father has it and you get
it, it's probably going to take place earlier in your life. And if you have a child, it will probably
take place even earlier in their life. So earlier and earlier and earlier onset in subsequent
generations, which is really horrible. But it's autosomal dominant. It's cag repeats. You may get
tested on that. It's cag repeats that cause abnormal huntington protein to accumulate in the
caudate nucleus and cause degeneration of that caudate nucleus in the basal ganglia.
Now when it degenerates, you actually get an excess of dopamine, okay? You have too much dopamine
going on in huntington disease and not enough acetylcholine, okay? And because you have too much dopamine,
remember dopamine is pro movement, all right? Anytime you increase dopamine in someone,
you're increasing movement basically in them. And so that's why in Parkinson's disease where you
have no dopamine because you lose all those dopamine producing neurons, you have no movement in
those patients. And in huntington disease, you have too much dopamine. So you have excessive
movement like choreoethatosis, okay? They're moving too much because they have too much dopamine.
Suicide is common in these patients because basically because this disease is horrible. And
what we do for treatment, we want to decrease dopamine, right? Because they have too much of it.
And we want to increase acetylcholine because they don't have enough of it, okay? Really with,
you'd think about Parkinson and huntington, you've probably seen that diagram a bunch in a bunch
of different textbooks about dopamine is on one side and acetylcholine is on the other side.
And it's really a balance, okay? If you have too much dopamine, not enough acetylcholine,
then that's huntington. And the opposite is Parkinson. Parkinson's disease, which we'll talk about
really shortly here. So the way we do this, we use anti-psychotics, which are anti-dopamine,
okay? We also use SSRS for the depression aspect. And Parkinson's disease. What happens in Parkinson's
disease is it's a degeneration of the basal ganglia, in particular the substantione nigra in the basal
ganglia, okay? Substantione nigra neurons degenerate, okay? Which means those produce dopamine,
which means now you have no more dopamine production in the basal ganglia. So you get really,
really pro-family decreased dopamine, and which means little to no movement, okay? There's a lot
of dopamine pathways in the brain that people will talk to you about. Really the most high yield one
for you to know about is what's called the nigrostriatal pathway. And that's the one in Parkinson's disease,
okay? You probably already know about it from med school, but as a refresher, it goes from the
substantione nigra to the striatum. And when you lose this nigrostriatal pathway, you get decreased
dopamine, and you get little to no movement, okay? Which is why Parkinson patients get acinesia
or hypokinesia. Popular nemonic for Parkinson's disease is that it's a trap, okay? So you get a
tremor, okay? Trap, like that. You get a tremor, that resting tremor, that pill rolling tremor
at three to five hertz. You get cogwheel rigidity, which is where you have their elbow like this. Here's
their shoulder, here's their hand. If you're trying to range their elbow and extend it, what's
happening is that they'll get this cogwheel rigidity. So it will like, if you start with their elbow
up here, you'll ratchet it down like that, and then you'll ratchet it again at each stage,
it resists you as you try to extend it, basically, at cogwheels. It ratchets down to here. It's not a
smooth range. It's not a smooth range of motion that takes place. It ratchets down. That's cogwheel
rigidity. Acinesia or hypokinesia, because they have no dopamine, so they can't move. That happens
and postural instability results from all this stuff. Postural instability is the most worrisome
component of this, because it leads patients to falling, basically, and having fractures and brain
injuries and all that. How do we treat this? We want to increase dopamine, right? That's pretty
simple. They have no dopamine, so we just try to increase it. We try to decrease acetylcholine
as well. It's all about that balance that we talked about. So we give them levedopacarpidopa.
We also give them amantidine, which increases the endogenous release of dopamine in the brain.
It's that we talk about it in the pharmacology chapter, but it's that anti-flu medication that
actually increases endogenous dopamine. So we use it in brain injury patients and Parkinson's
disease. Bands tropine is anticholinergic, so that can help in Parkinson. Mal-B or Compton
Hippeters, they just basically, those are enzymes that break down dopamine. And so the inhibitors
of these are drugs that decrease dopamine breakdown. And I mentioned earlier we can use DBS
in the subthelamic nucleus to treat Parkinson's disease if this other stuff fails.
And Parkinson's disease patients often get dysphagia, okay? So, you know, you want to have them
have a swallowing evaluation at the suspicion of dysphagia, basically. Ataxia, I believe this is our
final thing here. Friedrich ataxia is a peds, really a peds question that you might get.
This is an autosomal recessive disease that affects teenagers for the most part. These patients
get scoliosis. They are in a wheelchair in their teenage years and they get hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy, okay? Hocon. These are the biggest things to know about that.
And ataxia tolangectasia. This is basically what it sounds like. Ataxia with skin tolangectasia.
Okay. And so, that's going to include our stroke chapter and our movement disorders section.
And I hope this was helpful for you and I'll see you in the next section.
